 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 1 van 6 
Statement by Mr Bart De Wever, Prime Minister of Belgium, 
delivered at the General Assembly, Penary session ,   
New York, 2 5 September 2025   
  
Madam President,   
Esteemed colleagues,   
Ladies and gentlemen,   
It is the first time that I stand before you. I’m 54 years old, which means 
that I was a teenager in the 1980s, when Ronald Reagan was President 
of this great country.  A man that I admired and still admire.  
Today I’m nostalgic of that time because then I truly believed that the 
Western world was bound together by shared values and mutual respect. 
I also believed that our values would eventually  rule the entire world.  
Today w e are reminded of the Melian Dialogue  of the Greek historian 
Thucydides.    
He described how envoys from Athens forced the small, neutral island 
of Melos to choose sides in the Peloponnesian War.    
If Melos refused, Athens would destroy it.   
Thucydides captured the brutal logic of power in a single sentence:   
“The strong do what they can, and the weak suffer what they must.”   
 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 2 van 6 
He may have been right about human nature. But that is not the world 
we want to live in today.   
Civili sation means striving to be better than our basic instincts, to rise 
above them.   
The United Nations was born out of the most destructive war in human 
history to embody precisely that aspiration.   
And yet today, international organi sations are under 
pressure.  International law is under pressure. Respect for sovereignty is 
under pressure. Geopolitics often boil down to sheer ego -politics.  
And I regret this deeply.   
That is why I stand before you today to advocate for a world anchored 
in mutual respect.   
A world of free and fair trade.   
A world of strong  partnerships , respect  and cooperation.   
A world based on international law.  
A world that tackles climate change.  
A world of peace, prosperity, and progress.   
 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 3 van 6 
The United Nations remain  crucial in pursuing that ambition.   The 
United Nations  are far from perfect,  and this is why we support the 
UN80 reform agenda . 
Because the challenges we face, are immense.   
I will highlight two domains in which we urgently need to move 
forward: our security and our prosperity.   
*  
First, security.   
All who cherish freedom must work to build resilient and vigilant 
societies.   
We face new forms of imperialism, new military threats, and violent 
conflicts that destabilise entire regions.   
This is not the path we choose. But neither can we afford to be naïve.   
Those who wish for peace must be prepared to defend it.  That is why 
we stand firmly with Ukraine.  
We must erect a barrier against those who look at us the way the 
Athenians looked at Melos.   
 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 4 van 6 
Belgium is therefore assuming its full responsibility, investing more in 
defence. Together with our European partners, we are striving for 
greater integration of our armed forces  and defence industry.  
At the same time, we must strengthen ties with all countries committed 
to peace and stability.   
*  
We must also confront the rise of international organi sed crime.   
Criminals know no borders.    
Criminal networks exploit the gaps between police forces and legal 
systems.    
They fuel terrorism, human trafficking, and the illegal arms trade.   
But there is hope. Across Europe and in Latin America, I have 
witnessed a new willingness to deepen cooperation. I am convinced 
many African and Asian countries struggle with the same problems.   
Together, we can make our societies open for business but closed for 
crime.   
Because the security of our citizens must always remain our first 
responsibility.   
That is the first great challenge we must tackle.   
 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 5 van 6 
*  
Another  major challenge we face, is to ensure as much prosperity as 
possible for as many people as possible.   
The world today is, once again , gripped by  protectionism.   
And yet, the evidence of history is clear. For over two centuries, free 
and fair trade has been the only true engine of progress.   
It has decimated extreme poverty. It has dramatically increased life 
expectancy. It has enabled medical breakthroughs that defeated once -
devastating diseases.   
Free and fair trade is the way forward.   
We must nurture it and defend it.   
We must tear down trade barriers. We must allow our economies to 
grow across borders. We must stimulate productivity, strengthen labo ur 
markets, and invest in innovation.   
In short: we must create prosperity that is globally shared.   
And let us remember: prosperity engenders peace. Prosperity builds 
trust.   
Belgium stands ready to be your partner in this endeavo ur.  
Belgium is — and will always remain — open for business.   
 
 
         Kabinet van de eerste minister  
         Bart  DE WEVER  
 
 
 
 
Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussel | +32 (0)2 501 02 11 | contact@premier.be | www.premier.be  Pagina 6 van 6 
*  
Madam President, distinguished delegates,   
Let us not succumb to the harsh logic of Thucydides. Let us prove that 
the destiny of humankind is not to dominate or to suffer, but to 
cooperate  and to prosper .  
This should remain  the mission of the United Nations.   
Thank you.   
 