1 Intervention by the Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Benin at the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly New York, Monday September 29, 2025 370 Lexington Avenue. Suite 2200. New York, NY 10017 Telephone: 212 684 1339 / Fax: 646 790 3556 Emails: onu.newyork@gouv.bj/beninewyork@gmail.com Website: https://newyork.diplomatie.bj/ 2 - Madam President, - Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, - Ladies and Gentlemen the Heads of delegation, - Distinguished delegates, - Ladies and gentlemen, It is with a deep feeling of honor and responsibility that I take the floor on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Patrice Talon, President of the Republic of Benin, on the occasion of this 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly. I would like to extend, first of all, my warmest congratulations to Mrs. Annalena BAERBOCK for her brilliant election as president of this session and to assure her of the full support of my delegation in the accomplishment of her noble mission. I would also like to salute the constant commitment of Mr. António GUTERRES, Secretary General of the United Nations, for his tireless efforts in favor of peace, security, sustainable development and respect for human rights, in a global context marked by growing uncertainties and multiple crises. At this moment of celebration of the oak jubilee of our common Organization, it seems appropriate to me to carry out a critical assessment of its results with a view to identifying perspectives for a better and peaceful world. 3 We are meeting this year in an international climate heavily darkened by the multiplication of sources of tension, the worsening of humanitarian and climate crises, the increase in inequalities, as well as the erosion of confidence in multilateral institutions. These challenges, which are unfolding on a global scale, profoundly challenge our collective capacity to preserve peace, promote shared prosperity and protect human dignity. This very turbulent global context fully justifies the relevance of the main theme of the General Debate of this session “Better together: more than 80 years in the service of peace, development and human rights”. For Benin, there is only one response to these challenges: strengthen international cooperation, revitalize multilateralism, and restore full meaning to solidarity between peoples. Madam President, Today we are at a pivotal moment in contemporary history. The world, as we know it, is transforming under the effect of profound changes, notably the recomposition of strategic balances, technological acceleration, the climate crisis, the rise of interdependencies but also rivalries. These changes are not simple cyclical adjustments, but announce a new global geopolitical order. 4 We are witnessing a gradual shift towards a multipolar world. New powers are emerging, asserting their voice in international affairs, while strategic alliances are being reshaped. This dynamic opens up prospects for rebalancing, but also carries risks of fragmentation. My delegation emphasizes that this new world in the making should not lead to states of modest size being relegated to the role of simple spectators, nor should they disappear in the din of power rivalries. Our voices matter. Our experiences matter. Our solutions matter. The history of this organization, founded on the principle of the sovereign equality of States, has repeatedly shown us that actors of modest size are generally points of balance thanks to their capacity to embody measurement, dialogue and cooperation, which are the very essence of multilateralism. My country, Benin, sees its place in this new world order as that of an actor of stability and cooperation, that is to say a force of proposals which has no claim to want to determine world policy, but which has, on the great challenges that we are called to take on together, a vision to share. Our foreign policy is based on respect for international law and the primacy of peaceful solutions to disputes. We believe that the force of law must always prevail over the law of force. 5 We favor the virtues of preventive diplomacy, mediation and consensus building within regional and international organizations. Heir to a plural history, we defend cultural diversity as a pillar of world peace and work to reconnect Africa and its diasporas, in particular by offering Afro-descendants who so wish Beninese nationality out of recognition. In this new world order in the making, the question of national sovereignty returns to the forefront of debates. Across the world, nations are reaffirming their legitimate right to decide their destiny, protect their vital interests and preserve their territorial integrity. This aspiration is legitimate, because it is based on international law, the United Nations charter and the will of the people. But, at the same time, this quest for sovereignty is sometimes interpreted as a call for withdrawal and closure. For Benin, sovereignty rhymes rather with a capacity for autonomous action, backed by a clear vision of national interests and is exercised within the framework of an international system where each State, while remaining master of its choices, recognizes that common challenges require collective responses. True sovereignty is also affirmed in the capacity to dialogue, negotiate, cooperate and open up to the world. 6 Madam President, Benin observes with concern the multiplication of armed conflicts, from Eastern Europe to the Middle East, from the Sahel to the Great Lakes region, threatening the lives of millions of human beings, causing massive displacements of populations, without hiding the weakening of institutions and the destruction of infrastructure, which fuels a cycle of poverty and violence in areas of tension. Faced with these realities, our conviction is clear: no conflict can find a lasting solution by force of arms. Only inclusive dialogue, supported by real political will and accompanied by coherent international commitment, can pave the way for a just and lasting peace, particularly in the humanitarian chaos in Gaza, where the prospects for reconstruction seem uncertain. Benin reaffirms its support for the two (02) State solution as the only viable option for a definitive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the New York Declaration adopted at the end of the International Conference jointly organized by France and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in July 2025. Benin is also following with great concern the evolution of the crisis in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo, marked by the persistence of violence despite recent diplomatic initiatives. We welcome the efforts of Qatar and the United States of America to promote de-escalation and open up prospects for inclusive dialogue. 7 We call on stakeholders to silence the guns and encourage the African Union to ensure strategic coherence, operational complementarity and alignment of peace efforts in the Great Lakes region. Benin calls for preventive diplomacy to regain its place in the action of our organization. Preventing a conflict always costs less, humanly and financially, than managing its consequences, as is the case in our sub-region which is currently facing the threat. terrorism, violent extremism and transnational crime. The situation in the northern part of my country which is suffering attacks from terrorist movements, particularly the JNIM in the triple border point area with the Sahel countries, is critical. The Government is facing it with determination, with the support of international partners, through an inclusive strategy combining reinforced border security, community development initiatives, care for internally displaced persons and refugees, coupled with radicalization prevention programs. Terrorism is a transnational threat and without strategic cooperation and a strengthening of mutual trust between countries, national efforts to confront it unfortunately prove insufficient. 8 Furthermore, peace can only be preserved if it is based on justice and respect for international law. This implies that all member states fulfill their obligations, respect the sovereignty of nations and renounce any form of interference or aggression. Madam President, Ten years ago, the international community adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, carrying the ambitious promise to leave no one behind. Today, we must face a worrying reality, namely that the global trajectory of achieving the SDGs is seriously compromised. Successive shocks – the COVID-19 pandemic, security crises, exacerbated effects of climate change, geopolitical tensions and economic slowdown – have slowed down, or even reversed, progress in many countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Despite these challenges, Benin, under the leadership of President Patrice Talon, has undertaken profound reforms and mobilized strategic investments aimed at sustainably transforming the economy and improving the living conditions of its citizens. Significant results have been achieved on the SDGs, with nearly 60% of the 49 prioritized targets on track to be achieved. The 2025 SDG Index for Benin is 57.8 points, placing our country 1st in the world in terms of progress with a gain of 14.5 percentage points since 2015. 9 These positive results illustrate Benin's capacity to transform its public policies into tangible progress for the populations. Faced with the many challenges remaining to consolidate the achievements and fill the gaps, we call for general mobilization, less than five years before the deadline of the 2030 Agenda. This requires renewed multilateral action in favor of coherent implementation of the “Seville Compromise”, adopted at the end of the 4th International Conference on Financing for Development. We call for a profound reform of the global financial architecture and the governance of multilateral development institutions so that they further integrate the countries of the South into their decision-making processes, modernize their financial instruments in the light of new issues linked to the energy transition, social inclusion and climate resilience. Furthermore, achieving the SDGs requires considering young people and women not as simple beneficiaries, but as true partners in change. In Benin, more than 65% of the population is under 30 years old. Investing in their potential is not only a demographic imperative, but a strategic choice to build a prosperous, inclusive and resilient society. 10 Likewise, the empowerment of women constitutes a major lever for social and economic progress, guaranteeing shared and equitable growth. It is in this spirit that the Government of Benin, in partnership with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), organized the World Youth Summit on April 4 and 5, 2024 in Cotonou. The same city was home to the 30 and July 31, 2025, the annual coordination meeting of the African Union and Member States on the strengthening, implementation and promotion of the Women, Peace and Security Agenda in Africa in the context of the celebration of the 25th anniversary of the adoption of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325. Madam President, Faced with the current malaise of multilateralism resulting from geopolitical rivalries, the return of power logic and nationalist withdrawal, Benin urges a collective start for its revitalization in order to make it more inclusive and action-oriented. In this context, my delegation takes note of the “UN 80” initiative launched by the Secretary-General, and would like to emphasize the following points of attention: - the process of the “UN 80” initiative must be transparent, accountable and have the ultimate objective of improving the execution of the UN mandate in the interest of its Member States; 11 - the best response to the Organization's recurring liquidity problems lies in compliance by Member States with their obligation to pay their contributions, in full, on time, and unconditionally; - any proposal to achieve efficiency gains by reducing duplication and redundancies across the UN System must not aim to dismantle UN Agencies/Funds, to the detriment of assistance provided to Member States. Finally, Benin would like to underline the urgency of a thorough reform of the United Nations Security Council which is intended to be a requirement of the geopolitical reality of the 21st century. It is essential to capitalize on the results of last year's Future Summit, in particular the Future Pact which contains commitments for the enlargement of the Council. Benin reaffirms, in this regard, its support for the common African position, expressed in the Ezulwini consensus and the Sirte Declaration. Africa, which represents more than a quarter of the Member States and which is the scene of numerous issues on the Council's agenda, can no longer remain marginalized in decision-making. Allow me to conclude by quoting the African aphorism: “Alone we go faster, together we go further.” » May this maxim guide our steps, inspire our decisions and unite us in the quest for a better future for all humanity. Thank you for your kind attention.