PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO ________ Unity - Work Progress CABINET ________ ________ DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCE MR DENIS SASSOU-N’GUESSO PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, HEAD OF STATE AT THE FOURTH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September 24 2025 1 •Madam President of the General Assembly! •Mr Secretary General of the United Nations! •Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government! •Distinguished delegates! •Ladies and gentlemen! It is with gravity, but also with intact faith in the ideals of the United Nations, that I address you today. We are gathered at a tipping point, at a time when our collective responsibility has never been greater. 2 We are living in a period marked by increased tensions, multiple threats and deep fractures. And yet, the world has never had so much need for unity, cooperation and dialogue. What is at stake is not only peace or development, it is the very future of multilateralism and of this precious humanity that we share. Eighty years ago, after the horrors of the Second World War, the founders of the United Nations met with the firm intention of establishing a just and lasting international order. They dreamed of a world where cooperation and solidarity would be the key words, a world where diplomacy and dialogue would replace violent conflicts. Their project was ambitious. It remains completely current. 3 The United Nations was founded on the foundation of two major principles: -International solidarity, that is to say the conviction that the destiny of nations is intrinsically linked and that only a collective effort can make it possible to meet global challenges. -Multilateralism or the recognition that each nation, large or small, must have a voice in international affairs and that only collective action can guarantee lasting peace. 4 Unfortunately, 80 years after its creation, our Organization is faced with the worrying resurgence of armed conflicts throughout the world. In so many places, the language of arms has taken over common sense and diplomacy. This is the failure of our collective promise: that of building a world free from the scourge of war. It is also the sign of a weakened international system, sometimes powerless, in the face of logic of confrontation. Today, we must reaffirm the primacy of law in international affairs and the need for a world order based not on the force of arms, but on established and commonly shared rules. The United Nations must once again become an effective instrument of conflict prevention and mediation. 5 An actor loving peace and justice, which works for friendship between all the peoples of the world, the Congo supports peaceful coexistence, reciprocal tolerance and mutual understanding. This is why, in the Middle East, my country unreservedly supports the two-state solution, Israeli and Palestinian, living side by side in peace. In the Caribbean, my country will continue to support the Cuban people, exhausted by decades of an incomprehensible embargo. The commercial, technological and geopolitical tensions between great powers and 6 that we are witnessing today are obviously fragmenting our world and fueling distrust between nations. They weaken the chains of international solidarity and compromise our ability to tackle major global challenges together, with serious consequences for the economies of developing countries. This is reflected in particular by the instability of the markets, the increase in the prices of raw materials and recurrent disruptions in the chains supply. However, as understandable as it may be, economic competition should not turn into a systemic confrontation. 7 One of the great achievements of the United Nations has undoubtedly been to establish a solid platform for cooperation between nations. But today, this multilateralism is threatened by national selfishness and unilateral policies, a source of damaging diplomatic crises. This trend must be reversed, because the global challenges we face, including climate change, pandemics and food insecurity, require a united, coherent and concerted global response. The Republic of Congo firmly believes that a stronger and more effective United Nations is the essential condition for preserving peace and guaranteeing sustainable development. This is why we are calling for a reform of its organs, starting with its Security Council, in order to make them more representative, more transparent and closer to the realities of our world. We can clearly see that the Security Council, in its current composition, no longer reflects the geopolitical balances of our world. It is therefore urgent to reform it, not in theory, but in practice. Africa can no longer remain marginalized. It is a continent of more than one billion four hundred million inhabitants. It is a continent of the future, of 9 youth, of potential to which we must today guarantee full participation in world decisions. I say it here forcefully: Africa deserves permanent representation within the United Nations Security Council. Not as the recipient of a favor, but as a legitimate partner. This is the solemn appeal that the Republic of Congo is launching from this rostrum. We must invent a multilateralism that is more intelligent, more effective, closer to the aspirations of people, more representative of the realities of the 21st century. This multilateralism must also be translated into concrete actions, into tangible results, into lasting solutions. The people of the world will not judge us by our speeches, but by what we have been able to accomplish together. •Madam President! •Ladies and gentlemen! There can be no lasting peace without development and vice versa. Poverty, inequalities, youth unemployment and exclusion are breeding grounds for frustration, instability and violent extremism. We must honor our commitments to finance the Sustainable Development Goals and put an end to mechanisms that strangle vulnerable economies, such as unsustainable debt or unfair trade rules. International solidarity remains essential to enable developing countries to successfully transition to a more prosperous future. This is why we must invest massively in education, health, agriculture, infrastructure, new technologies, artificial intelligence, etc. 12 The climate challenge concerns us very strongly today. It transcends all borders, all divisions and all ideologies. It is already hitting our cities, our countryside, our ecosystems. It aggravates conflicts, destroys ancient cultures and pushes entire families onto the roads of exile. Faced with this, we no longer have the right to act in a dispersed manner. We must leave in close line, in solidarity and with determination. This implies respecting the commitments of the Paris Agreement, massive support for adaptation for the most vulnerable countries, and a profound transformation of our modes of production, consumption and financing. This is an opportunity to welcome the adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of the 13 Resolution on the Global Decade of Afforestation and Reforestation, which my country initiated, as one of the solutions likely to advance our common fight for the preservation of the environment and the mitigation of the devastation linked to climate change. The climate must not become a new factor of North-South division. It must be a factor of global unity, a reason for planetary solidarity, the motive of shared hope. •Madam President! •Ladies and gentlemen! At a time when the nations of the world are facing serious challenges, some of these challenges clearly having an existential impact, a new and worrying arms race is underway! Global military spending is now reaching record levels, even as millions of people live in extreme poverty, with reduced access to clean water, quality education and primary health care. Treaties on disarmament are being called into question, while the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, is returning to the heart of its concerns. This drift is dangerous in every respect. It does not make our world safer. On the contrary, it exposes it to the most serious dangers, including the risk of a generalized conflagration, which would escape all control. 15 Faithful to its commitment to peace and international security, the Republic of Congo reiterates its call for global disarmament. Now is the time for all of us to invest in finding solutions that strengthen our collective security, stability and prosperity for all people, rather than fueling the vicious and destructive cycle of conflict and violence. •Madam President! •Ladies and gentlemen! In this unstable world, many people have doubts today. Many people wonder: are the United Nations still useful? Do they still serve any purpose? To these, I would like to answer clearly from this rostrum: yes! 16 Yes, the United Nations is even essential. But on one condition, namely that they know how to evolve, that they know how to reform, get closer to the people and respond concretely to the countless challenges of present times. We are not condemned to war, withdrawal and mistrust. We still have a choice: that of courage, solidarity and responsibility. So, together, united in diversity, let us bring to life the founding promises of our Organization, namely peace, dignity and progress! Let's not let history be made without us! 17 Thank you. 18