 
 1  
 
 
 
Commonwealth of Dominica  
Statement by  
 
Her Excellency Sylvanie Burton, DAH,  
President of the Commonwealth of Dominica  
 
On the Occasion of the 80th Session  
of the  
United Nations General Assembly  
 
Theme: “Better Together: 80 years and more for 
Peace, Development and Human Rights.”  
 
Thursday, 25th September 2025  
United Nations Headquarters  
New York  
 
 

 
 2 Excellencies,  
Distinguished Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Mabrika! Mabrika!  
I bring you greetings in my native Kalinago 
language, the language of the first people of the 
Caribbean whom I am proud to call my ancestors.  
 
Madam President,  
On behalf of the Government and People of the 
Commonwealth of Dominica, I am pleased to congratulate 
you, my fellow woman,  on your appointment to guide the 
affairs of the 80th Session of the United Nations General 
Assembly, a responsibility for which you are eminently 
qualified. We wish you every success in your new role!   
 
 3 Excellencies, I address you at a pivotal time in the history 
of this organization, and indeed of this world. I am 
reminded of the words of the famous British Novelist 
Charles Dickens in his acclaimed novel , and I quote,  “A 
Tale of Two Cities ”, a novel set in a time of social 
upheaval, division and transformation. I quote  “It was the 
best of times, it was the worst of times….” End quote . 
 
Although this novel was written over one hundred and sixty 
(160) years ago, these words remain relevant today . As we 
celebrate 80 years of the existence of the United Nations, 
we are living a tale of two worlds.  
 
A Tale of Two Worlds:  
For some it is indeed the best of times. Strong economies, 
access to education, medicines, top class health care, clean 
water, sanitation, and housing. They  are at the frontier of 
artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies, with 
 
 4 expanding digital infrastructure and rising standards of 
living.  
 
But for many it remains the worst of times: Persistent 
poverty, growing hunger, displacement, instability and war; 
nations on the frontlines of climate change, enduring the 
worst impacts and debt crisis not of their own making, but 
a price they pay for the excesses of others.  
 
Unfortunately, this is not fiction, but our shared reality. If 
we as the “United Nations” do not confront this duality, 
this inequality, we will write a catastrophe  of our own.  
 
It bears restating that the UN was created 80 years ago, to 
prevent wars, to promote peace and international 
cooperation, based on ideals of mutual respect, human 
rights and the rule of law. It has championed 
multilateralism, recognizing that no one country has the 
 
 5 answer for the world’s problems, that the world is 
interconnected, and to maintain peace we should operate a 
rules-based and not power based approach.  
 
A Tale of Two Cities  portrayed a society where the 
powerful live in luxury and the oppressed suffer in silence. 
We can take heed of the warning that we glean from 
Dickens work, that injustice should not be ignored, that 
when powerful nations impose their will on the less 
powerful, without accountability or regard for the rule of 
law, they plant seeds of discord and future unrest.  
 
What have the lessons taught us? What should we ask 
ourselves as we gather year after year in this Chamber? Are 
we truly listening to the nations that take the podium every 
year to decry poverty, inequality, climate change, 
underdevelopment and conflict? Do we have a system 
where resources and decision making are truly being 
 
 6 equitably shared, or are we instead operating a system 
where power protects itself?  
 
I am reminded of the old African proverb “ When elephants 
fight the grass gets trampled” . We the small island 
developing states, we are that grass. In today’s geopolitical 
landscape we feel the brunt of the impact when global 
powers engage in political, economic or military 
confrontation. Economic sanctions, trade restrictions, aid 
conditionalit ies, conflict and wars, to name a few, affect 
global supply and the affordability, availability and 
transportation of goods and materials. This significantly 
increases the cost of doing business and the prices of basic 
foods on our supermarket shelves, putting several goods 
out of the price range of many.  
 
We have come here time and time again to advocate for 
fairness, to advocate for understanding, to advocate for 
 
 7 change, in respect of matters that concern our very viability 
as small nations; on matters that affect our very lives and 
livelihoods. A major area for us is the devastating impact of 
climate change on our nations.  
 
Yet, in climate negotiations powerful nations still drag their 
feet, polluters enjoy protection, and adaptation and 
mitigation efforts are underfunded. Meanwhile our 
countries, which everyone accepts contribute the least to 
the climate crisis, continue to risk extinction from rising 
seas, extreme flooding, devastating storms, drought, 
amongst many other negative impacts of climate change.  
 
How can this be fair? How can this be morally defensible?  
 
While we complain about these things, equally  horrifying  is 
the indiscriminate and deliberate loss of life that we see 
around the world from bombings, from induced hunger, 
 
 8 from sanctioned violence, and genocide. We do not have the 
power to prevent the storms and to bring the rains where 
there is drought, but we do have the power to limit further 
climate change and help countries adapt and mitigate its 
impact. So too, we have the power to end wars and not 
start new ones. We have to be willing to talk to each other, 
to empathize with each other, we should return to the 
founding  principles  of the United Nations . 
 
Wherever there is conflict, be it in the Horn of Africa, the 
Middle East, and Southeast  Asia or sad to say in the 
Caribbean, major powers engaging in geopolitical conflicts 
result in civilians becoming collateral damage, economies 
collapsing, increase in prices and instability. I want to 
emphasize here today that there is no place in the 
Caribbean for war. The Caribbean is a Zone of Peace. Any 
military conflict in the Caribbean will have significant 
negative impacts on the Caribbean and Latin America. 
 
 9 There is a better wa y to resolve differences.  We urge the 
powers that b e to find another way.    
And so, Madam President, I return to our “Tale” where a 
man dismissed by society gives his life for another - Are the 
wealthiest nations willing to give up dominance for 
fairness? To make sacrifices to ensure justice, equity, and 
climate resilience for all? Will we choose compassion and 
empathy over control and indifference?  
 
Haiti  
Madam President,  
We stand in solidarity with the people of Haiti. We insist 
like other CARICOM  Member States, that the current crisis 
being confronted by our sister CARICOM State, in no way 
nullifies the entitlement of its people to the recognition of 
their sacred sovereignty, and their right to be central in the 
search for a fair and durable peace in their country.  
 
 
 10 The Government of Dominica remains convinced that our 
sister CARICOM State , Haiti faces major challenges  today  
in part because of the glorious contribution Haiti made to 
the quest for justice and freedom in our region and the 
world. Indeed, the current complexion of this august body 
would have been unimaginable without the heroic struggles 
of the Haitians. As such, the crisis in Haiti is much more 
than a Caribbean crisis, and its solution requires a united  
 
response and the support of the United Nations to resolve.  
 
My delegation unreservedly supports the position of 
CARICOM on the situation in Haiti, a position that rightly 
calls for a Haitian -led-and-owned transition process, to 
bring across systematic changes for the benefit of the 
Haitian people. Let us provide them with all of the support 
that they need. Nothing less is demanded of us.      
 
 
 11  
CUBA  
 
Madam President,  
The Commonwealth of Dominica is keen to underscore its 
commitment to advocating for unity, justice, peace and the 
sustainable human development that they foster.   In this 
regard, we continue to urge that the long -running unjust 
and illegal economic embargo against the people of Cuba 
be revoked. Maintaining this embargo is harmful, not only 
to the long -suffering people of Cuba , but also  to the image 
and profile of its sponsors.  Cuba like every other country  
has a right to its self -determination.  Dominica continues 
to stand in solidarity with Cuba.    
 
BLOCKADE  
The trade and economic embargo imposed against our 
brothers and sisters in Cuba, continues to be of great 
 
 12 concern to us in the Caribbean. Its lifting grows 
increasingly urgent. Therefore, the Commonwealth of 
Dominica once again joins its voice with the voices of the 
overwhelming majority of members of this global 
organization, to call for the immediate lifting of trade 
restrictions and export bans imposed on the good people of 
Cuba. They are unjustified! They are unjustifiable! They 
belong to a bygone era. They should cease to exist. They 
fall, in our view, within the grand narrative of yet another 
Caribbean people’s struggle for liberation. It is for these 
reasons that the Government of Dominica strongly urges a 
radical reconsideration of these actions.  
 
LIST OF STATE SPONSORS OF TERRORISM  
 
Venezuela  
Madam President,  
 
 13 Our steadfast advocacy for respect for the United Nations 
norms of sovereignty and non -interference, impels us as 
well to urge that the right of the Government and people of 
Venezuela to resolve internal challenges without outside 
interference be respected. We renew our condemnation of 
the imposition of sanctions on Venezuela. The resulting 
hardship forced upon the people of Venezuela needs an 
immediate and complete end.  
 
We also call for restraint and strict adherence to the rule of 
law as relates to the presence of US military assets in the 
blue waters of the Caribbean Sea . The solution to conflict, 
to challenges should never be aggression and war. We urge 
that all diplomatic efforts be pursued to respect the 
sovereignty of States, preserve the dignity of human life, 
and promote peace.  
 
Madam President,  
 
 14 As we celebrate this 80th year of these United Nations 
under the theme , and I quote,  “80 years and more for 
Peace, Development and Human Rights”, end quote, let it 
not be just mere words. Let it instead be a call for respect 
and adherence to a rules -based order, that applies to all 
nations equally, weak and strong, not just when it is 
convenient to the most powerful.  
 
The UN arose out of the ashes of a world torn by 
devastating wars. Let us not return to those dark days, but 
instead be guided by law, diplomacy and shared values.  
 
Let us reform the system where small and developing 
nations have a real seat at the table. That we may have the 
opportunity to influence decisions that shape global 
climate policy, security, and economic well-being  for all.  
 
 
 15 Let it be where we build solidarity and cooperation, and 
where power is exercised with humility, compassion and 
restraint.  
 
Let the history books say that in this Chamber, in our time, 
we chose a better path. In the words of Charles Dickens , 
and I quote,  “It is a far, far better thing that I do, than 
I have ever done….”  End of quote.  
 
Let those words not only be the end of a novel but also the 
beginning of a new era for us, the beginning of our 
collective resolve, where our actions are guided by the 
desire for true peace, by respec t for others and the rule of  
law, for upholding the sanctity of human life, of ensuring 
true development and prosperity for all.  
 
 
 16 Let us judge the strength of our global system not by how 
loudly the elephants roar but by how well we protect the 
grass beneath them.  
 
Excellencies, the challenges before us are too great and 
complex for any one nation to solve alone.  We all need 
each other.  So let us leave this hall committed to action, 
committed to partnership, and committed to each other.  
Because the truth is simple, yet profound: we are always 
stronger, wiser, and better together.  
 
Madam President,  
 
 I look forward to the day when a woman leads this great 
institution as Secretary -general, which to my mind would 
be a symbol of true equality.  
 
I thank you for the courtesy of your attention.  