Check against delivery  
1 
 Statement by Denmark at the 80th Session of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, General Debate, 29 September 2025  
 
Madam  President, Mr. Secretary General, Distinguished 
Delegates, Friends, Colleagues,  
Eighty years ago, representatives from around the globe came 
together to establish the United Nations.  
My country, Denmark, was part of that historic moment.  
But many other nations were not given that opportunity.  
In 1945, the world was still a world of  Empires. Of colonies and 
dependent territories that were not free to choose their own 
political destiny.  
The establishment of the United Nations did not change that 
overnight. Yet, it set the world on a course toward a radically 
different order.  
An orde r based on the equal rights and self -determination of 
peoples and of nations. Large and small. A rules -based 
international order.  
Check against delivery  
2 
 As this order grew into being, the world saw tremendous progress.  
More than a billion people were lifted out of poverty.  
Standards of living and life expectancies rose.  
A network of economic, political, social, and cultural relations 
across the globe were formed.  
It even seemed that wars between states were becoming a thing of 
the past.  
In recent years, this path has been br oken.  
Wars are back.  
Extreme poverty is on the rise.  
International law is under pressure.  
Does this mean that the UN has become irrelevant?  
Of course not.  
The conclusion is the opposite:  
The UN is as essential as ever.  
Without the UN, the world woul d be in a much worse state.  
Check against delivery  
3 
 But as the world is changing, so must the UN.  
* 
Excellencies,  
Last year, we agreed on the Pact for the Future. We committed to 
updating global governance. Doing away with historical injustices 
of the existing system. Expanding the Security Council and 
reforming the International Financial Architecture. Bringing about  
a system that delivers for all.  
This year, the Secretary -General presented his UN80 Reform 
Initiative.  
I thank the Secretary -General for this bold act of leadership. I 
encourage – and expect – more concrete proposals on how to 
adapt the UN system to new  realities. Making hard choices. And I 
ask fellow member states to engage constructively in the process.  
* 
Excellencies , 
As an elected member of the Security Council, Denmark works 
towards ensuring that the Council fulfils its vital mandate. 
Check against delivery  
4 
 Towards safegu arding international law including international 
humanitarian law, and ensuring that the voices of those affected 
by conflict are heard by the Council.  
At times, we succeed. With fellow members, through a shared 
sense of purpose.  
Too often, however, resu lts are not possible. Too often, the 
Security Council is divided. Unable or unwilling to act.  
The costs of inaction are felt across the world.  
From the raging war in Sudan, to the erasure of women’s rights in 
Afghanistan. From the spiralling gang violence  in Haiti, to the 
crisis in Myanmar, to the instability across the Sahel.  
Not to mention the horrible situation in Gaza.  
* 
Excellencies,  
Almost two years have passed since the horrific terrorist attack by 
Hamas on October 7th 2023. An attack that tore through Israeli 
families and left a nation wounded to its core.  
Check against delivery  
5 
 Denmark has repeatedly and consistently condemned the attack 
and called for the immediate release of all hostages.  
We have also said from day one that Israel has a right to self -
defence.  
But what is going on in Gaza right now has nothing to do with 
self-defence.  
A man -made famine is spreading. Thousands of civilians are being 
killed. The humanitarian catastrophe is of unbearable scale. It 
must be brought to an end immediately. Israel must comply with 
international law, including international humanitarian law.  
The war in Gaza needs to stop.  
The two -state solution remains the only solution to lasting peace.  
For two peoples.  
Both deserving of security.  
Both deserving  of dignity.  
The high -level conference on the two -state solution Monday 
clearly demonstrated that the momentum is growing.  
Check against delivery  
6 
 That we are witnessing a renewed energy and enthusiasm for 
peace based on the two -state solution. A solution that Denmark is 
prepared to build on.  
The keys to recognition of a Palestinian state can no longer lie in 
the hands of the Israeli government.  
The Palestinians themselves must become masters of their own 
destiny.  
* 
Excellencies,  
In Ukraine, Russia’s horrific and illegal  war of choice continues. 
A war that could end tomorrow; if only Russia wanted it to. If 
only Russia would withdraw to its own territory and refrain from 
trying to alter international borders by force.  
Russia’s blatant violation of the UN Charter is felt most intensely 
in Ukraine and Europe. Yet, its political and economic 
repercussions are felt across the world. From the disruption of 
supply chains to global inflation. Costs that are born primarily by 
developing countries, far away from the European battl efield of 
Russian creation.  
Check against delivery  
7 
 From the outset, Denmark has stood by Ukraine. Politically, 
economically, militarily. And let there be no doubt, Denmark will 
continue to support Ukraine, for as long as it takes.  
We must support Ukraine’s military, as it fight s to protect its 
people, its territory and its freedom.  
This is exactly what Denmark is doing through a range of 
initiatives. We call on others to step up and do the same.  
Because Ukraine is not just fighting for its own existence. It is 
fighting to defe nd the very principles that define the UN -based 
world order:  
Territorial integrity.  
National Sovereignty.  
And the right to political independence.  
Let us never forget, that Russia is the aggressor.  
Russia’s repeated violations of European sovereign ai rspace - with 
aircrafts and drones - underline Russia’s insistence on staying on a 
path of war.  
Check against delivery  
8 
 Colleagues, I ask you, are these the actions of a country genuinely 
committed to peace?  
* 
Excellencies,  
Our collective inability to halt the killings, sufferin g, and 
injustices in Gaza, Ukraine, Sudan and beyond, must not prompt 
us to submit to a world ruled by brute force.  
On the contrary, it must inspire us to work harder to sustain the 
instruments and mechanisms, we have built over the past 80 years.  
To Denma rk, this includes maintaining our firm support for the 
ICJ and ICC as core international justice institutions. We do 
believe this is paramount.  
It also includes maintaining our firm support for the Sustainable 
Development Goals. With only five years to 20 30, we are still far 
from reaching the goals. And the financing gap is widening.  
For 45 years, Denmark has delivered on the UN target of 0.7 per 
cent in Official Development Assistance.  
We call on fellow member states to join us.  
Check against delivery  
9 
 Not as an act of altruism but as a long -term investment in our 
shared future.  
* 
Excellencies,  
In a world of competing crises, climate change and its impact 
remain real.  
Flooding, drought, heatwaves.  
Again, th e costs of inaction are felt across the world and 
particularly in developing countries.  
The COP30 climate Summit in Brazil will be a decisive moment.  
The benefits of the green transition are evident. Demand for clean 
technology is on the rise.  
In 2024, more than 90 per cent of new power added to the world’s 
grid came from renewable energy.  
Green transition is not only good for the planet, but also for 
investments, innovation, jobs, competitiveness, and resilience.  
Sometimes, all good things really do g o together.   
Check against delivery  
10 
 * 
Excellencies,  
Building a liveable planet for future generations is not just about 
nature or resources.  
It is about people.  
Defending human rights is as essential today, as it was in 1945. 
Perhaps even more so, as the pressure is growing, especially on 
the rights of women and girls.  
To Denmark, it is evident that gender equality is not only the right 
thing to do. It is the smart thing to do.  
That is also why Denmark – as we look to the upcoming process 
of selecting a new Secretary General  for the United Nations – is 
encouraging member states to put forward qualified female 
candidates.  
After 80 years, it is high time for a woman to be at the helm of this 
organisation.  
* 
Check against delivery  
11 
 Excellencies,  
In closing, I would like to recall the wisdom of Nelson Mandela: 
‘It always seems impossible until it is done.’  
When we compare the world of today to the world of 1945, the 
progress is evident.  
Empires have been dismantled.  
Millions have been lifted out of poverty.  
The equal rights of all human beings and of nations large and 
small have been recognized.  
In a world of rapid change and growing uncertainty, we must not 
lose sight of how far we have come. Nor must we forget that it 
was by working together, we got here.  
Let us rekindle the spirit of cooperation, that led to the 
establishment of the United Nations 80 years ago.  
‘It always seems impossible until it is done.’  
Thank you!  
 