LÕPP  
 
Address by the President of the Republic of Estonia Alar Karis at the 80th United 
Nations General Assembly  
 
 
Ms President,  
Mr Secretary General,  
Excellences,  
Dear ladies and gentlemen,  
 
 
United Nations is an idea of a better world.  
 
It is an  idea that is not an abstract construction nor an empty 
declaration, but carefully crafted agreement.  
 
A grand agreement that is the basis for current multilateral 
world order. An agreement designed to protect international 
peace and foster prosperity. An agreement to ensure free and 
dignified life for everybody. An agreement that is based on the 
understand ing that destruction and horrors of war must not be 
repeated.  
 
Unfortunately, the international law based multilateral system, 
with the UN and its C harter at the core , that was supposed to 
keep us all safe is increasingly under strain . Its fundamental 
principles are violated in numerous conflicts across the world. 
Brutality prevails. We simply cannot let this go on.  
 
We all should be asking what kind of future do we want? Will 
it be a world dominated by barbaric  use of force and violence, 
where might is always right? Or do we want a peaceful and 
prosperous world where law and order, justice and universally 
agreed rules and principles prevail? This question is relevant for 
everyone in this room despite of the distance of our own homes 
from the frontlines in Ukraine, Gaza, Sudan, or the DRC. 
Multilateral world order based on international law and the 
principles of the UN Charter must be maintained and 
strengthened. What our peoples are expecting from us as the 
world leaders today is to bring back the San Francisco spirit, to 
preserve peace, and to reinforce the principles of the UN 
Charter.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine constitutes one of 
the gravest breaches of international law and the UN Charter 
since its adoption 80 years ago. Despite repeated calls by the 
General Assembly to stop the aggression and set the course 
towards pea ce, Russia continues its savage  assault on the 
Ukrainian state and nation.  Russia´s war and its war crimes are 
undermining the reputation and credibility both of the Security 
Council and the entire U nited Nations . This blatant assault on 
the principles of the Charter is undermining the multilateralism, 
global peace and security.  
 
Regrettably, as we speak, Russia is targeting Ukrainian 
kindergartens, schools, hospitals, nurseries with missiles, 
drones, gliding bombs, mines, shells and bullets. The same 
Permanent member has been systematically abducting and 
deporting Ukrainian childr en, erasing their identity and forcing 
them into indoctrination. A human suffering in Ukraine has 
reached unprecedented levels. Only the UN Human Rights 
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has documented the death of at 
least 14000 civilians, including almost 10 00 children and for 
about 35 000 civilians injured including more than 2000 
children. The death toll increases with every year, month, week 
and day.   
  
In total disregard of President Zelensky agreeing to ceasefire in 
March , and of the recent peace efforts by the United States, 
Russia has significantly intensified its campaign of terror with 
a barrage of drone and missile strikes on civilian targets.  
It is evident that Russia has no intention of agreeing to a 
ceasefire, let alone a lasting peace. In response to recent peace 
efforts, Russia has instead intensified its campaign of terror 
with a barrage of drone and missile strikes on civilian targets. 
Russia’s objectives have not changed: they remain the 
subjugation of all of Ukraine and the reshaping of Europe’s 
security order to satisfy Russia´s own neocolonial and imperial 
ambitions. The increasing violations of neighbouring countries’ 
airspace  by Russ ian drones and missiles are yet another 
escalation and a stark reminder that Russia’s aggression 
threatens not only Ukraine but the security of the entire region. 
Hereby I have to regrettably tell you that just weekdays  ago, 
three Russian fighter planes violated Estonian airspace, a 
hostile  act that is part of  a pattern of similar recent incidents 
happening on the European Union’s eastern border.  Therefore , 
the only viable way forward towards a ceasefire and just and 
lasting peace is to increase collective  international pressure on 
Russia  to force them to peace in Ukraine  and to act in a way 
that is expected from a Permanent Member of the Security 
Council.  
Let me assure you that my own country, Estonia, will continue 
to do everything possible to reinforce Ukraine’s ability to 
defend itself in full conformity with the Art 51 of the UN 
Charter. Doing so we are defending the sovereign equality of 
all the Member states, large and small – one of the core 
principles on which the United Nations was founded. We are 
also advocating for making Russia accountable for all its crimes 
in Ukraine, including for the crime of aggression, as we know 
too well that impunity only leads to new crimes, new suffering 
and even greater injustice.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
The international law based multilateral system  has also failed 
to protect Palestinians and Israeli s. Having visited both Israel 
and Palestine this year, I witnessed firsthand the devastating 
impact of this long -lasting conflict. Hamas’ brutal terrorist 
attacks on 7 October have been  condemned by the whole world.  
Hamas cannot have any role in the future governance of Gaza 
and Palestine . It has to b e guarantee d that the horrors of 
terrorism would  never be repeated.  
 
However,  ordinary people and children  in Gaza  must  not be the 
ones to pay the price. I am devastated  that so many innocent 
lives, including children’s lives have been lost due to military 
action , starvation and the spread of disease. The promise  of 
international humanitarian law was to ensure that  people  do not 
suffer during armed conflict . And yet, w hat has unfolded in 
Gaza has crossed all red lines . 
 
Estonia has  supported all efforts for a ceasefire that would end 
the killing , destruction of lives , and bring all the hostages home. 
In order to alleviate the unbearable humanitarian situation, 
Israel must fully respect international humanitarian law and 
implement its commitments regarding access and delivery of 
humanitarian aid and security of aid workers.  
 
In order to  truly end the cycle of violence, we need a 
comprehensive political process with the end goal of two states  
– Israel  and Palestine  – living  side by side in peace and security . 
I commend the efforts of France and Saudi Arabia to step up 
international action to implement the two -state solution .  
 
Dear Friends , 
 
The United Nations must be capable of fulfilling its core 
functions.  In order to face the multitude of current global 
challenges, a ll the pillars of the UN – peace and security, human 
rights and sustainable development – have to be strengthened. 
Estonia, therefore, supports an ambitious system -wide reform 
of the United Nations. This is not only an issue of monetary 
efficiency  and financial  discipline  - it is a structural problem  
and a credibility question for the UN . For this reason , we are 
fully behind the Secretary General in his endeavours in pushing 
the UN80 reform vigorously  forward.  
 
Within this transformation , the reform of the Security Council 
is of central importance . Estonia supports the expansion of the 
Security Council membership so that it would include countries 
that have , inter alia , demonstrated their unwavering 
commitment to the international law and the principles UN 
Charter , and have consistently acted in accordance with these 
principles. Further more , if we want  to have  a functional and 
respected Council , we also need  to restrict the use – or rather 
abuse - of the veto, increas e the transparency of the Council’s  
work and its accountability . 
 
Last but not least, we also need to ensure  transparency when it 
comes to the selection of the next Secretary General of the UN.  
After 80 years of men -only leadership,  we are very supportive 
to the idea that based on a fair process seeking the most 
qualified candidate, it is high time for a woman to be chosen as 
UN Secretary -General. We need to put forward ambitious 
selection criteria, clear timeline and assure greater role of the 
General Assembly in this process. Given the current credibility 
crisis of the UN, we cannot afford to fall short in the selection 
process.   
 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
Sustainable development with clearly defined goals remains a 
central focus of the UN.  We have to redouble our united efforts 
to address  global challenges like  the effects of ongoing climate 
change , which  are getting worse in all parts of the world.  
  
The upcoming COP30 in Brazil should  be a turning point. 
Countries should  submit strong climate plans. These plans 
should cover all parts of the economy and follow the 1.5 -degree 
goal of the Paris Agreement. Substantial progress during this 
decade is crucial.  
 
We must work together to triple renewable energy production 
by 2030, because this is the most effective way to reduce 
emissions.  Estonia shows that this is possible. We used to rely 
on oil shale, a local fossil fuel , for our energy production,  but 
today, nearly 40% of our electricity comes from renewable 
sources. This change happened because of political will and 
private investment s.  
 
Let us now raise our ambitions together! Like we did when we 
agreed on a world clean -up day to be acted upon on 20 
September at Estonia’s initiative and example  worldwide . Not 
to celebrate but to do  it!  
 
Dear Colleagues , 
 
In the myriad of cha llenges we face , accessible education is  a 
prerequisite of understanding the  current problems , learning 
from the mistakes of the past,  and crafting a better world.   
 
Estonia ’s educational system ranks high in many international 
rankings . We see how this has had an impact to  many other 
fields  where Estonia has been doing well  – including digital 
governance, media freedom or innovation.  
 
Our goal is to share with our partners, including through 
UNICEF board, our diverse experience in innovation in 
education, developing education policies, reforming education 
and improving the availability of high -quality education.  
 
Every situation, every culture, every context is unique and 
requires specifically developed solution. However, allow me to 
draw your attention to one specific  experience of ours . 
 
In 1991 , at the start of the internet revolution,  we decided to 
radically integrate  computers  and internet into our education  
system . The programme  Tiger Leap, which had the aim of  
opening a computer class in every Estonian school within a 
year, was a cornerstone  of Estonia  becoming  one of the most 
digital societies in the world  today . 
  
World today  looks different from the one 34 years ago. But new 
technology is  there  again and  waiting to be put into best use . 
Therefore, Estonia  is making a new Leap  – the Artificial 
Intelligen ce Leap . We are again providing the best 
technological tools  available to our students and teachers so that 
we keep comparative edge in education for years to come.   
 
Equipping citizens with the skills to use AI wisely and 
responsibly is essential.  AI must serve dignity,  development , 
and human rights – not the other way around.  
 
In Estonia we believe in innovation and we are most ready to 
develop new tailor -made solutions with our goo d partner s all 
around the globe.  In collaboration  with the International 
Telecommunications Union  and Germany , Estonia ha s co-
founded  the GovStack initiative.  This innovative platform 
provides governments with digital public infrastructure toolbox 
aimed at modernizing digital services by creating modular, 
open -source and scalable framework for governments 
worldwide.  
 
Dear Member States , 
 
Whichever global problem we approach, we have to build on 
human rights and basic freedoms . Yet today, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms are increasingly under pressure 
worldwide. This is a deeply worrying trend that demands our 
collective response. This is the idea that guides us also on the 
way of becoming a member of Human Rights Council for the 
period of 2026 -2028 , and I would ask your support at the 
elections next month . Our priorities d uring our membership are 
the promotion and protection of children’s rights, safeguarding 
digital rights and reducing the digital divide, and advancing 
media freedom. All three are critical for advancing democracy 
and protecting international law based multilateral world order.  
 
We are capable of learning as human beings and as a mankind. 
We learn from mistakes. We get up and we’ll do better.  Let's do 
it!  