Page 1 of 19 
 FIJI NATIONAL STATEMENT  
HON SITIVENI RABUKA  
PRIME MINISTER OF FIJI   
"Better Together: 80 years and more for peace, development and human rights"  
80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
United Nations Headquarters, New York, Friday 26 September, 2025  
____________________________________________________  
Madam  President of the UN General Assembly  
The Secretary General of the U nited Nations  
Leaders, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good Evening  
I congratulate Her Excellency Annalena Baerbock on assuming the 
Presidency of the 80th Session of the General Assembly, as only the 
fifth woman to be elected to this position in the last 80  years .  
Madam President, Fiji reiterates its long -standing support for 
multilateralism and the role the international rules -based order  
plays for the status and interests of small states.  
 
Page 2 of 19 
 This year Fiji commemorates 55 years of independence  and stands 
alongside member  states and take stock of the 80 years since the 
founding of the United Nations.  
Eight years after independence, Fiji volunteered  to be  a troop 
contributing country to the United Nations’ peacekeeping effort. 
Our commitment  is unwa vering . We continue t o be the largest per 
capita contributor to United nation ’s peacekeeping for over four 
and half decades.  Our belief in the principles of the UN Charter  is 
steadfast . 
 
The most critical challenge facing nations in the Pacific region is to 
find an enduring framework that influences the strategic 
competition between the major powers , towards a stable 
multipolar region where peace prevails. I am conscious of the direct 
connectedness between the Pacific and Indian Oceans , so when I 
talk of the Pacific,  I am also referring to the Indo -Pacific Strategic 
area.  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 19 
 Ocean of Peace  
Excellencies, when I addressed this Assembly in September 2023, I 
introduced the concept of Ocean of Peace, as the Pacific’s 
contribution to global order. The turmoil within each of our region s 
and the global community has been the common theme of the 
World leaders’ statements this week. The question before us is: 
what must we do?  
 
The vision of the “Pacific as an Ocean of Peace” is rooted in the 
noble values of mutual respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity, 
and political independence. It embodies the essence of our 
commitment to peace and unity. These are born from the very 
Pacific Way of life, that is the life -long integral heart to our identity 
as Pacific peoples.  
It is my honour to announce that the Leaders of Pacific Nations had 
adopted the Ocean of Peace D eclaration at the Pacific Islands 
Leaders Meeting, under the Chairmanship of Solomon  Island s’ 
Prime Minister, the Hon Jeremiah Manele on Thursday the 11th of 
this month . In so doing, the Pacific Leaders have declared and 
claimed the right of our people to peace.  
Page 4 of 19 
 The concept of peace comes from deep within our faith in the God 
of peace and justice that finds its expression in our own Pacific Way .  
The Pacific Way  was a phrase coined by Fiji’s first Prime Minister, 
Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, in his first speech in this Hall in 1970, to 
describe the ‘calm, conciliatory and orderly moves to 
independence’ by Pacific Island states. At the core of the Pacific 
Way lies respect, quiet leadership and reconciliation. It is not a 
coincidence that Chapter V I(6) of the UN Charter is entitled the 
“Pacific Settlement of Dispute” (Articles 33 – 38). 
 
This concept therefore sits snugly with this year’s theme. "Better 
Together: 80 years and more for peace, development and 
human rights".  
 
If we must be better together, we need prolonged peace 
everywhere. Peace is the absence of fear and troubled hearts. Peace 
is the starting point; it is how things are held together and is the 
end state.  
 
Page 5 of 19 
 The Pacific knows the value of peace as we had lived through the 
horrors of its absence. Our ocean, its diverse and vibrant lands had 
been a theatre of the two World Wars, and a testing ground for the 
world’s most dangerous weapon s – its impacts are still felt and seen 
today.  
It is our expectation that the Ocean of Peace Declaration is seen as 
the platform that spurs on the evolution of our region’s 
longstanding commitment to peace and prosperity.  
 
Much has been said in this Forum about conflicts during the past 
80 years including those raging today. I urge and pray for balanced 
consideration s. We look at how these conflicts started  and b y 
whom . Be it in Ukraine, Gaza or else where . What is the motive of 
those that started these wars? What have they done to try and end 
it, if any? Is our prescription for a solution based on history, on 
truth, on fairness?  
Madam  President, we cannot be talking about ending the war 
without guaranteeing Israel its right to peaceful existence , nor the 
peaceful existence of the Ukrain ian people.   
Page 6 of 19 
 For peace, we, collectively, have a responsibility to seeing this is 
done. Anything short , is hypocrisy on our part.  
 
Building peace and sustaining it in the next 80 years demand s of us 
to be truthful as the necessary first step. That our aim must be for 
the dignity of people s, on all sides of the conflict.  We cannot be 
selective with truth. ‘Doing to others as we want others to do unto 
us’ is a must , if peace, sustained peace, is to be part of the new 
world order in the next 80 years. Falling short of this might be a 
reason the United Nations is not delivering at capacity.  
 
Approach to the Establishment of Fiji Embassy Jerusalem and 
Other Missions  
Excellencies,  sustainable peace is neither built overnight, nor by one 
actor alone. Progression from cold to warm peace demand s faith, 
courage, and a strong will. The cost of building peace is usually 
high. Yet the cost of its absence is higher. If we hope to realize the 
full promise of the UN Charter, we must tackle the root causes of 
instability with the same urgency as we do their consequences.   
Page 7 of 19 
 This must start with truth - its understanding and acceptance - 
however difficult this might be. Without truth, our words are 
hollow, and our efforts destroy the very outcome s we desire . 
History plays a big part. In our pursuit of peace, we must pursue 
this on the right side of history.  
 
These are not abstract observations. But informed by Fiji’s 
experience of 45 years in international peacekeeping engagements , 
where I was a peacekeeper . This is underlined by the Ocean of 
Peace principles to promote peace as we have done since WWII 
and especially during the recent four decades in the Middle East 
region. Our diplomatic engagements are informed by these 
principled understandings.  
 
Under the Ocean of Peace, Fiji sees its responsibility in advocating 
peace within and on behalf of the Pacific region, a responsibility I 
do not take lightly as the Prime Minister  of my country . Under our 
foreign policy priority of ‘family first Pacific regionalism, Fiji stands 
with our Pacific members.  
 
Page 8 of 19 
 We know that sustained peace is only possible with prosperity . 
Fiji’s primary focus is development  where my government’s full 
attention is directed at poverty alleviation . Perhaps a way of 
assisting developing economies is to open markets for our  
produce . This reinstate s and sustains the dignity of nations. 
Together, peace and development are integral to attaining the 
human rights of peoples.  
 
Furthermore, peace and prosperity for our people mean address ing 
the expanded definition of security with climate change high on the 
list. 
Climate change  
Fiji, like other small island developing states (SIDS), face ominous 
and disproportionate climate threats with negligible fraction of 
global emissions.  
Those who shoulder the blame must foot the bill.  
Science is clear, the powerful G20 Group  has been responsible  for 
80 per cent of total emissions.   
Page 9 of 19 
 I plead with them that t hey must lead the charge – keeping with 
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities in light of different national circumstances.  
Heading to COP30, I hope that the world will push harder, and 
members agree , on pending common grounds  of concern . Fiji 
stands strongly in support of Australia’s bid to host COP31  as a 
Pacific COP .  
We need a Loss and Damage Fund that meets the scale of the 
challenge – and developed countries meeting their adaptation 
financing promises.  
We continue to reward polluters who wreck our planet. The fossil 
fuel industry continues to pocket massive profits and subsidies, 
while everyday people bear the costs of climate catastrophe – from 
rising insurance premiums to lost livelihoods.  
We insist on a shift from fossil fuel subsidies and investments to a 
just energy transition by putting a price on carbon; And to 
implement innovative sources of financing – including solidarity 
levies on fossil fuel extraction – through legally -binding 
mechanisms.   
Page 10 of 19 
 Madam President, the ICJ Advisory Opinion on Climate Change on 
July 2025 affirms thi s - countries that are liable for climate change 
damage must bear the full cost. Some Pacific atolls sit 1 to 2 meters 
above mean sea level.   
It is grossly unfair that when disasters hit, the costs of recovery force 
these countries to take on debts; a second layer of penalty for a 
situation they did not c reate .  
As signatory to the Paris Agreement, we are contributing our fair 
share towards the global effort, to guide our low -carbon, climate 
resilient development.  
Displacement and Relocation  
Under our ‘family first Pacific regionalism’ foreign policy priority, Fiji 
stands with its fellow Pacific Island neighbors. Some of our smaller 
Pacific Island communities are struggling to stay above sea level. 
The international community is faltering in its commitments to 
keep below 1.5 degrees Celsius. Low lying Pacific states expect the 
worse.  
Today, my government is looking at ways to host these island 
communities if it is not possible to remain on their islands.  
Page 11 of 19 
 The dignity of the people that are forced to leave their homes is 
fundamental. That starts with a legal definition. To date, they are 
merely referred to as ‘displaced people’.  
In the Pacific, where over 90% of land is communally owned, those 
that are being displaced will be landless before they become 
stateless, stripping them further of their dignity . 
In this situation Fiji is coming face -to-face with the reality of 
‘sovereignty within sovereignty’  in all its details. Goodwill, time 
and resources are critical. This is complex, sensitive and costly work. 
We’re setting the precedent. We have no margin for error as we’re 
dealing with real lives, whose impacts may compound existing 
stresses.  
Ocean  
Excellencies, one of the biggest victims of the climate crisis is the 
ocean  itself.  Fiji depends on the health and wealth of the ocean. 
We need to step up efforts to sustainably use and manage our 
ocean resources: address plastic pollution; conserve biodiversity.; 
and protect endangered species.  
Page 12 of 19 
 Fiji’s ratification of the BBNJ Agreement this year is intentional. We 
need to safeguard our ocean resources in line with the outcome of 
the Third UN Ocean Conference in Nice.  
A much -needed shift is also required to address the ever -increasing 
share of fish stocks , exploited beyond sustainable levels in our 
Economic Exclusive Zones and the High Seas.  
Subsidies is a well -known driver of overfishing and overcapacity. Fiji 
is not only actively addressing IUU fishing but also deposited its 
WTO instrument of ratification as our contributions to addressing 
this emerging threat.  
The Plastic Treaty is an urgent goal that our global community can ’t 
wait to end . With this, financing is key.  
Financing for Development   
The convening of the Fourth Financing for Development in Sevilla 
and its “Sevilla Compromise” lays an important milestone to 
address global financing needs.  
 
Page 13 of 19 
 The existing financing architecture systemically disadvantages SIDS 
through complex processes and lengthy approvals while our 
communities face, daily, the ravages of climate change. Reforms are 
needed now to address the widening gap that is now $4 trillion . 
As a small economy, we need direct funding access modalities, 
simplified procedures, and SIDS -specific funding windows. 
Adaptation costs per capita are highest for island nations. This must 
change to address our reality.  
All these are mapped out in the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for 
SIDS (ABAS). With two years lapsed,  it is critical  that ABAS is 
expedited with the implementation of its Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework.  
UN SIDS – special situation (Antigua and Barbuda Action for 
SIDS and MVI)  
Excellencies, SIDS urgently require the expedited implementation 
of the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI) to complement 
GDP per capita criteria in determining development support 
eligibility.  
Page 14 of 19 
 SIDS have championed the MVI because of its direct relevance to 
overcoming the institutional blindness that has long ignored the 
reality of our unique circumstances and structural vulnerabilities. 
The MVI provides a more comprehensive and accurate assessme nt 
of our development needs by incorporating factors such as 
environmental fragility, economic vulnerability, and structural 
constraints that traditional income -based measurements overlook.  
 For Fiji as with other SIDS, the implementation of MVI is a matter 
of development justice - ensuring that international support 
mechanisms recognize our inherent vulnerabilities and provide 
appropriate assistance regardless of per capita income levels. We  
call upon the international community to prioritize the swift 
operationalization of MVI as this tool is essential to ensuring that 
no SIDS is left behind due to misleading income classifications that 
mask our true development challenges.  
UN80 – UN Presence in the Pacific Region  
Excellencies, as we mark the UN’s 80th anniversary and discuss UN 
reform, Fiji notes  that the U N remains an indispensable partner for 
development in Pacific SIDS.  
Page 15 of 19 
 Our unique challenges require the specialized support that only the 
UN system can provide. Striking the right balance between a strong 
UN presence and operational effectiveness that reflects the 
priorities of PSIDS is preferred.  
On our part, Fiji is finalizing arrangements for a purpose -built UN 
House that will provide a functional platform for UN operations .  
Constitution of Fiji  
Excellencies, Fiji is pursuing constitutional reform. A recent 
Supreme Court ruling opened a pathway for the review of our 
constitution. This process ensures that the will of the people is 
accurately reflected in a revised constitutional framework that 
embodies the values of good governance and justice. Our 
approach prioritizes human rights, and democratic participation 
while strengthening the institutional foundations necessary for 
sustainable democracy.  
Fiji Truth and Reconciliation Commission  
Fiji’s political journey has been marked by periods of instability. 
With the need for healing and progress, a Truth and Reconciliation 
Page 16 of 19 
 Commission has been established to provide a platform for all 
voices to be heard, particularly those affected by past upheavals.  
This Commission represents our commitment to confronting our 
history, fostering dialogue between communities, and building the 
foundation for a more cohe rent society. While this is progressing, 
we remain committed to international peace, stability, and the 
values that unite us as members of the international community.   
We congratulate those countries that have successfully trodden this 
path before and  encourage those that haven’t to get on it too.  
Drugs  
Excellencies, Fiji is challenged by an upsurge in transnational 
organized crime. Drug trafficking has exploited our vast maritime 
domain, spanning over 1.3 million square kilometers of ocean. This 
crisis threatens our national security and social fabric while 
exploit ing our limited capacities.  
Our approach must be holistic, combining law enforcement with 
mental health support, community -based recovery programs, and 
trauma -informed care for those affected.  
Page 17 of 19 
 Fiji looks forward to working with partners to addressing trafficking 
sources of supplies, routes, enforcement, disrupting and 
dismantling supply, reducing demand, healing and rehabilitation of 
affected individuals and communities.  
National Security Strategy: The Role   
In response to the multitude of issues confronting Fiji following 16 
years of autocratic rule, and the responsibilities associated with 
being the regional hub, a structured way of managing the security 
front was needed. Fiji launched its National Security Strategy (NSS)  
in June this year . This came at the back of Fiji’s first ever Foreign 
Policy White Paper and National Vision document.  
The Strategy s erves as the framework to safeguarding Fiji’s national 
security interests in an increasingly complex security environment.  
Further, t he strategy embraces the tenets of regionalism in the 2050 
Pacific Strategy for the Blue Pacific, that also promotes prosperity, 
human rights, and cooperation with partners.  
Non-Communicable Diseases  
Additionally, Fiji confronts a non -communicable disease pandemic 
that poses one of our greatest public health challenges in years. 
Page 18 of 19 
 Our response strategy aligns with SDG Goals 3 and 4, embracing 
linked approaches to ensure right lifestyle choices, accessible and 
quality care; and scaling up the healthcare workforce.   
We are fostering public and private partnership to leverage 
innovation, expertise, and resources  to reduc e premature mortality 
from NCDs by one -third by 2030. A health -first approach is 
necessary for national growth and resilience.                                                                 
 
Diaspora Strategy  
Excellencies, for a small economy we need all hands -on deck. Fiji 
recognizes the potential in our diaspora community of 
approximately 300,000 Fijians worldwide . Their  remittance 
exceeded one billion dollars in 2024. Optimising this capacity 
through an appropriate strategic framework will enhance their 
engagement as partners in national development. I belie ve that 
distance does not diminish citizenship, and their expertise and 
networks are bridges and catalysts for growth and global reach.   
Second World Social Summit  
Fiji welcomes the convening of the Second World Summit for Social 
Development, to be held in Doha in November  (2025) .  
Page 19 of 19 
 This is a useful platfor m to address pressing social challenges that 
disproportionately affect SIDS and the global South.  
The Summit is an opportunity to renew our collective 
commitment to ensuring that social progress remains at the heart 
of our development efforts  
Conclusion  
Excellencies, as we stand at this juncture of human history, Fiji calls 
on all member states, on us, to embrace with far greater 
commitment the values which is the foundation of the United 
Nations. This is a defining moment. We cannot compromise on 
truth, love, faith, and justice. What hope do we have for the next 80 
years if we lose our principles. ‘Peace on earth and goodwill to all 
man’, came at a price. Our wisdom is in not having to keep on 
paying that price because we abandoned the values that was the 
United Nations. We must act with the urgency and purpose that 
this moment in history demands. Our shared humanity depends on 
our courage to act as one. In those values,  there, you will find Fiji 
standing with you.  
Thank you , and May God Bless us all.   