Page | 1  
  
Speech to be delivered by H.E. Mikheil Kavelashvili , President of Georgia at the 80th 
Session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in 2025  
 
 
Madam President,  
Mr. Secretary -General,  
Distinguished Colleagues,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
I represent a country with a three -thousand -year history, the cradle of one of the wor ld’s most ancient 
civilizations  and the brave Georgian people, filled with pride and dignity. A country that possesses a 
unique alphabet, an ancient language  and a 17 -century -long Christian tradition.  
 
The history of Georgia is a continuous chronicle of our people’s struggle for survival against invaders, 
through which we have miraculously managed to preserve our cultural identity, traditions  and 
national character.  
 
Despite centuries of continuous warfare with invaders, the cultural environment in Georgia has 
always been distinguished by exceptional humanism, tolerance and compassion  for others.  
 
Tolerance, openness to others, h armonious coexistence  and diversity form the cornerstone of our 
ancient culture, which is brilliantly reflected in Georgian polyph ony, in our national traditions  and in 
the world -renowned Georgian epic, Shota Rustaveli’s The Knight in the Panther’s Skin.  
 
Georgia is a place where, throughout history, no human  has ever been oppressed or persecuted on 
ethnic or religious grounds.  Quite the opposite, we have always been known for our profound sense 
of justice.  

Page | 2  
  
I represent the Georgian people, who know both the cost of war and the value of freedom and peace. 
A people who cherish their rich history and traditions, while at the same time facing with resolve the 
challeng es that lie before our country.  
 
Amid a rapidly -changing geopolitical landscape and unprecedented global challenges —such as 
ongoing conflicts,  climate change, ideological po larization, cultural alienation  and war -driven 
humanitarian crises —Georgia stands firmly as a guardian of dialogue, peace, stability  and sustainable 
development.  
 
Despite the many challenges surrounding us, we have managed to ensure the security of our people. 
The fundamental philosophy of the Government of Georgia remains to preserve peace and, no matter 
the cost , to spare our people from war.  
 
For the fourth year now, a horrific, bloody war has been raging in Ukraine, bringing catastrophic 
consequences and immense human suffering. Drawing on the  bitter experience of the 2008 W ar, 
whose wounds have not yet healed for the Georgian people, we understand better than many the 
pain that the Ukrainian nation endures today. Now, as before, Georgia expresses its firm and 
unwavering su pport for the Ukrainian people.  
 
As we deeply understand the importance of peace, Georgia contributes to the transformation of the 
South Caucasus and strives to turn it from a zone of conflicts into a space of dialogue among 
civiliz ations and economic prosperity.  
 
We welcome President Donald Trump’s peace initiative between Armenia and Azerbaijan, as well as 
his efforts to bring the bloody war between Rus sia and Ukraine to an end soon.  
 
Georgia has always supported and actively strived to establish sustainable and long -term peace in the 
South Caucasus, as well as to deepen trust and c ooperation among its neighbors.  
 
For centuries, our country has been a crossroads of civilizations and a space for dialogue among 
diverse cultures. Today, Georgia is reclaiming its historical role.  
Page | 3  
  
Close relations with the countries of the South Caucasus and Central Asia, existing agreements with 
the European Union, and Georgia’s key position in the Middle Corridor all give our country a special 
significance both within the region and  across the Eurasian continent.  
 
Georgia is the shortest connecting route and a natural bridge between Europe and Asia, the West and 
the East. Thanks to our geographical location and pragmatic foreign policy, Georgia is emerging as a 
multidimensional and multifunctional regional hub, both  in ter ms of trade and energy transit.  
 
Georgia makes a significant contribution to the development of the Middle Corridor strategic route 
and does everything to ensure that the corridor be comes the safest, most reliable  and most stable 
connecti ng route between East and West.  
 
We are actively working with international inves tors, developing infrastructure  and facilitating the 
creation of new energy transit routes, all of which ultimately enhance the connectivity betw een Asian 
and European markets.  
 
Within the framework of the Middle Corridor  and it s development, Georgia has launched strategically 
significant projects aimed at increasing the vo lume and intensity of rail, sea  and air transportation. 
Among them, the railway modernization project has already been completed, while work is actively 
underway on the deep -sea port in Anaklia, the new i nternational airport in Tbilisi  and the Blac k Sea 
submarine cable projects.  
 
These projects, on the one hand, provide land -locked countries in Central Asia and the South 
Caucasus with maritime connectivity to the rest of the world; on the other hand, the projects we are 
implementing help diversify energy routes, thereby significantly enhancing the energy security of 
Europe and the South Caucasus.  
 
To promote the development of the Middle Corridor and enhance connectivity between the two 
largest markets, Asia and Europe, Georgia has been hosti ng the Tbilisi Silk Road Forum  for eight years. 
It is an international platform for dialogue and new opportunities, attended by up t o 2000 delegat es 
from more than 60 countries.  
Page | 4  
  
Our goal is to develop constructive relations based on mutual respect and shared  benefit with major 
economies such as the United States, China, European Union  and others. We are open to any dialogue 
and cooperation, but at the same time, we demand respect and a fair and dignified approach. What 
the Georgian people will never accept is being spoken to in the language of ultimatu ms, blackmail  or 
intimidation.  
 
Georgia is a faithful adherent to the fundamental principles and values of the United Nations and a 
dignified, responsible member of the international community, as evidenced by the considerable 
efforts made by the current Government of Georgia to improve t he protection of human rights.  
 
It is precisely thanks to the pragmatic and rational policies of the Government of Georgia that we 
have maintained peace and economic growth, significantly improving the q uality of life of our citizens.  
 
Despite numerous challenges in recent years, Georgia has demonstrated remarkable resilience to 
external shocks. The positive trajectory of Georgia’s development is reflected in and confirmed by the 
international rankings and indicators of the world’ s most reputable organizations.  
 
Despite 20% of Georgia’s territory remaining under occupation, we continue to pursue development 
and progress with great energy and determination. We are entrusted with the mission that our 
children may live in a stronger, dignifie d Georgia and a peaceful world.  
 
And n ow, I want to address our Abkhaz and Ossetian brothers and sisters on the other side of the 
occupation line. For centuries, we have written Georgia’s history together —a history filled with the 
heroism of our ancestors, through our shared struggle for the s urvival of our nation and love for our 
homeland. We have never been a large  empire imposing its rules on others. We have always been a 
country proud of its diversity.  
 
Georgia is a place where civilizations have met, blended  and balanced each other for centuries. Our 
culture is the very product of this complex and enduring synthesis.  
 
Page | 5  
 My Abkhaz and Ossetian brothers and sisters, our cultural code has not changed. For  us, diversity is 
not a problem; it remains an essential formula for  our existence, which is why we will always meet 
our compatriots from the other side of  the occupation line with open hearts and outstretched hands.  
 
It is our duty, through joint efforts, to overcome artificially created ob stacles, rebuild broken bridges  
and leave past grievances to history, as a people of excep tional patience and resilience.  
 
I believe that one day we will live together with our children in a united, happy  and developed 
Georgia, where nothing will stand in the way  of our harmonious coexistence.  
 
Here with , I would like to express my gratitude to the international community for its unwavering 
support of Georgia’s soverei gnty and territorial integrity.  
 
Georgia, like the entire world, is going through a pivotal moment in modern history. We live in a 
transitional era, where the future of the international order remains uncertain. The United Nations 
must ensure our planet’s t ransition to a peaceful, stable  and fair multipolar international order.  
 
Georgia, as a responsible member of the international community, is ready to support the United 
Nations in becoming the inevitable alternative to war and the principal guarantor of peace. I would 
like to reiterate that we are prepared and open, taking into  account our national interests, to engage 
in dialogue with all parties on issues of global and regional significance.  
 
The current reality requires us to face difficult issues and initiate an open, pragmatic  and results -
oriented dialogue. I believe that only in this way can we overcome common global challenges and 
unlock new opportunities for the benefit of our countries, p eoples  and future generations.  
 
Thank you!  