1 REPUBLIC OF GUINEA SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL AMARA CAMARA MINISTER SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC HEAD OF DELEGATION GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY THEME: “Better together: more than 80 years in the service of peace, development and human rights ". SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 27, 2025 Good morning/Hello, 2 Madam President of the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly, Mr. Secretary General, Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of Delegations, It is an honor and a privilege for me to speak at this universal platform on behalf of His Excellency President Mamadi Doumbouya, President of the Republic of Guinea, Head of State. On this solemn occasion, he instructed me to convey his warm congratulations to Mrs. Annalena Baerbock for her brilliant election as President of the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly and to assure her of the full support of the Republic of Guinea during her mandate. While welcoming the constant efforts of Mr. Antonio Guterres for world peace, we also pay tribute to Mr. Philemon Yang for the remarkable work accomplished during the 79th session. The Republic of Guinea, whose voice we have the honor of carrying, fully identifies with the theme of this present session: “Better together: more than 80 years in the service of peace, development and human rights”. In our national context, this theme takes on a particular resonance: “better together” thanks to refoundation. After more than 66 years of independence, peace, living together, development and human rights are becoming a reality in Guinea. I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to receive the fraternal greetings of the sovereign people of Guinea, its President and its Government. Speaking here two years ago, President Doumbouya said: “My country continues to place hope in the United Nations to find appropriate solutions to the issues facing our world. But the fundamentals that governed the creation of our organization must adapt to the profound changes in our society. » This hope, unfortunately, tends to give way to worry. Because it is now obvious that the world is turned upside down, no continent is spared: • peace is becoming a luxury, • wars and conflicts are becoming commonplace, • international and regional organizations are weakening, • and alliances too often depend on the will of the leaders of the moment. At this rate, we must have the courage to admit that the best years of our common organization could well be behind us. Ladies and Gentlemen, 4 There is an indissoluble link between peace, development and human rights. We pay tribute to the men and women who, all over the world, fight for peace, but it is clear that the simple denunciation of atrocities too often remains the last level of action by the international community. Furthermore, nature, once attacked by man, is inflicting the most dramatic consequences on us today: • the scarcity of arable land, • the worsening of droughts, • the increase in floods, • the heat which has become increasingly unbearable. These realities must challenge us and push us to deeply question ourselves. Ladies and Gentlemen, The well-being of the people and living together are the true synonyms of peace. This is what President Doumbouya already affirmed by making this priority the guideline of his action. Thanks to its rigor and constancy, Guinea has reconciled with itself and is courageously moving forward on the path to development. By affirming the end of an unbalanced and unjust era where Africa did not have the right to chapter, President Doumbouya made the choice to fully assume national sovereignty: 5 • It was first of all our mining sovereignty, through the withdrawal of several permits that did not comply with the texts and laws, in particular the Mining Code of the Republic of Guinea; • But also of our intellectual sovereignty, through the transformation of our education system and the promotion of excellence. This is how the Simandou Academy initiative was born, which offers the best children in the country in terms of academic performance the opportunity to study in the best schools in the world and in the best conditions, in order to provide Guinea with the human capital necessary for its development. Ladies and Gentlemen, We know, better than anyone, the price of peace and the cost of underdevelopment. This is what justified, in the recent past, the assumption of responsibility by our Defense and Security Forces to prevent our country from sinking. Today, in a methodical approach focused on the future, President Mamadi Doumbouya initiated the SIMANDOU 2040 program, built around five strategic pillars: 1/- Agriculture, the food industry and trade: which is the engine of our growth; 2/- Education and culture: which are our foundation of tomorrow 6 3/- Infrastructure, transport and new technologies: to further connect our country; 4/- Economy, finance and insurance: in order to guarantee our financial sovereignty; 5/- Health and well-being: which constitutes a national priority. The Simandou project, which is home to the largest iron deposit in the world, will significantly contribute to the decarbonization of the planet thanks to the exceptional content of its ore (65%). To guarantee the sustainability of the program, a sovereign fund will be set up and funded by revenues from Simandou, supplemented by other traditional mechanisms. Ladies and Gentlemen, Allow me to recall once again the words of a great African leader who said from the top of this rostrum, I quote: “Very clearly, without hypocrisy, without false pretense, eye to eye, We are all aware that this democratic model that you so insidiously and skillfully imposed on us after the La Baule summit in France, almost in a religious way, does not work. The various economic and social indices are there to demonstrate this. This is not a value judgment on democracy itself. It’s a balance sheet. An observation over several decades of chaotic experimentation of this model in our environment. A period where it was only a question of political games. To the detriment of the essential. The economy.” In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the Republic of Guinea has just reached a historic milestone by obtaining its first inaugural sovereign rating, classified “B+ with STABLE outlook” by Standard & Poor’s (S&P)! Thanks to the vision and leadership of His Excellency the President of the Republic, General Mamadi DOUMBOUYA, Guinea is today reaching a major milestone with this international recognition. This rating now places Guinea as the 2nd economic power in French-speaking West Africa and opens the way to more favorable and competitive access to international capital markets. For the Republic of Guinea, respect for human rights means recognition of the inherent dignity of each person and the application of principles and standards that protect these rights, as defined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Unfortunately, its application throughout the world remains variable, depending on the region, the actors, the contexts and the interests. 8 Ladies and Gentlemen, By coming here, President Doumbouya instructed us to reaffirm his sincere support for the theme of this session. He attaches importance essential to peace, development and human rights. Madam President, In wanting to provide our country with a constitution that resembles us and brings us together, a process of consultation and the search for inclusiveness was initiated. It was certainly long but useful and necessary in view of our liabilities. We are pleased to announce from this rostrum that the draft constitution which was submitted to the people by referendum was adopted by a very large majority. Since yesterday September 26, 2025, following its promulgation by the Head of State, the Republic of Guinea now has a constitution which marks its return to the constitutional order long awaited by our populations and the international community. Thank you for your kind attention.