1 
  
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF GUINEA -BISSAU  
 
 
 
 
 
STEMENT OF  
 
H.E. UMARO SISSOCO EMBALÓ  
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA -BISSAU  
 
AT THE  
 
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80 TH SESSION  
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2 5th 2025 ) 
 
Madam President , 

2 
 Distinguished Heads of State and Government , 
Mr. Secretary -General , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
Allow me to begin by congratulating Mrs. Annalena Baerbock on 
her election as President of the 80th Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly. I thank the outgoing President, Mr. Philemon 
Yang, for his service to the international community.  
 
To Secretary -General, António Guterres, I wish to reaffirm 
Guinea -Bissau’s full support for his tireless efforts in favor of 
world peace, international cooperation, multilateralism, and 
sustainable development.  
 
Excellencies , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
Eighty years ago, the founders of the United Nations pledged “to 
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.” That 
promise, unfortunately, has not yet been fully fulfilled.  
 
Yet, this commitment —undertaken by each Member State upon 
joining the UN Charter —remains valid and continues to be 
honored through the dedication of every UN peacekeeper and 
every humanitarian worker, who often make the difference 
between life and death in conflict zones or following natural 
disasters. UN agencies, such as WHO, UNESCO, UNICEF, FAO, 
WFP, UNHCR and UNDP, among others, provide treatment, 
3 
 education, vaccines, food and protect, every day, millions of 
human beings, and contribute to the fight against poverty and 
discrimination against women and girls, all over the world.  
 
The United Nations remains relevant, especially in these times of 
deep global uncertainty and crisis. It continues to be the only 
forum where all nations —large and small —have a seat and a 
voice.  
 
Excellencies , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
We live in a world confronted by multiple crises.  
 
We are witnessing what Secretary -General António Guterres has 
called “polycrisis”. Conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza, Sudan, and other 
regions persist.  
 
Socioeconomic inequalities, environmental shocks, political 
instability, and humanitarian emergencies disproportionately 
affect developing countries, with the greatest impact on small 
island developing states.  
 
Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has 
slowed significantly or even stalled. The sovereign debt burden of 
poor countries is increasing, while development assistance is 
declining.  
4 
 Guinea -Bissau welcomes the “UN80 Initiative,” and we hope it 
will contribute to strengthening the Organization —especially in 
promoting peace, international security, and the achievement of 
the SDGs.  
 
The “Pact for the Future” offers a roadmap and an action plan that 
must not remain on paper.  
 
Madam President , 
Excellencies , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
Last July, Guinea -Bissau hosted the 15th Conference of Heads of 
State and Government of the Community of Portuguese -Speaking 
Countries (CPLP). I have taken on the Presidency of the CPLP for 
the 2025 –2027 term.  
 
The CPLP places high importance on its cooperation with the 
United Nations and its specialized agencies. During our term, we 
will continue to work with all partners and multilateral 
organizations toward the implementation of global 
commitments —especially concerning the Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change, the Third UN Ocean Conference, and the Fourth 
UN Conference on Financing for Development, held last June -
July in Seville.  
 
5 
 We are convinced that two major international meetings 
scheduled for November —namely, COP30 in Belém, Brazil, and 
the Second World Summit for Social Development in Doha, 
Qatar —will serve as key platforms and opportunities to 
strengthen our cooperation and to advance our shared goals.  
 
Madam President , 
Excellencies , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
Guinea -Bissau is scheduled to hold presidential and legislative 
elections on 23 November this year.  
 
All necessary conditions are being put in place to ensure that 
these elections are held peacefully, freely, transparently, and 
credibly.  
 
Over the past five years, I have prioritized dialogue, inclusion, 
political stability, and the consolidation of the Democratic Rule of 
Law.  
 
I am confident that these upcoming elections will reaffirm the 
irreversible nature of citizenship and democratic values in 
Guinea -Bissau.  
 
 
 
Madam President , 
6 
 Excellencies , 
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
 
Allow me to conclude:  
 
In an increasingly interdependent world, we need —now more 
than ever —a world order grounded in the principles enshrined in 
the United Nations Charter, in respect for international law, and in 
peaceful coexistence.  
 
In this regard, Guinea -Bissau reiterates our call for an end to the 
economic, commercial, and financial embargo and other forms of 
restrictions imposed on Cuba.  
 
Eighty years after the creation of the United Nations, the world 
has changed.  
 
We are no longer just the 51 countries who signed the UN Charter 
in 1945.  
 
Today, the United Nations is all of us: the 193 Member States, 
plus observer states, NGOs, civil society organizations, and other 
actors represented in this great Assembly Hall.  
 
To meet the challenges of the 21st century, the UN must 
undertake urgent reforms:  
 
➢ Reforms that reflect today’s geopolitical realities and global 
power balances;  
7 
 ➢ Reforms that expand and democratize the Security Council;  
➢ Reforms that provide a place and a voice to the Global 
South;  
➢ Reforms that restore confidence in multilateralism and 
international cooperation.  
 
The UN continues to be a unique multilateral space where 
dialogue is still possible, even when diplomacy and good offices 
fail elsewhere and in other circumstances.  
 
The legitimacy, strength, and future of the UN lie in the inclusion 
and full participation of all of us in deliberations and decision -
making.  
 
Its core ideals —peace, dignity, equality, poverty eradication, 
cooperation, and peaceful resolution of conflicts —remain alive, 
and continue to inspire the purposes of the international 
comm unity and the march of Humanity.  
 
Thank you very much.  
 