 
Page 1 of 5 ADDRESS BY 
HIS MAJESTY KING ABDULLAH II 
AT THE PLENARY SESSION OF THE  
80TH GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS  
23 SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
 
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
Madam President,  
Mr. Secretary General,  
Your Excellencies:  
 
Another year, another UN General Assembly, and another occasion whe n I 
stand before you to address the same issue: the conflict in the Middle East.  
 
And not for the first time, developments on the ground have made me question 
the worth and utility of words  … in capturing  the magnitude of the crisis. Yet, not 
speaking about it , would signal acceptance of the situation and abandonment of our 
humanity  — and that , I will not do.  
 
Our UN General Assembly was born 80 years ago, pledging to learn from  — 
not repeat — history.  
 
The world  vowed: Never again.  
 
However, for almost as long, Palestinians have been living through  a cruel 
cycle of ‘yet again’.  
 
Bombed indiscriminately … yet again.  
 
Killed, injured, and maimed… yet again.  
 
Displaced and dispossessed …yet again.  
 
Denied rights, dignity… their basic humanity… Yet. Again . 
 
So, I must ask…  how long ?   
 
How long  will it be before we find a resolution  to this conflict  — one that 
safeguards the rights of all sides , and allows a level of normalcy in the lives of the 
families  at its core?  
 
Page 2 of 5  
How long  will it be before I stand before you and speak … not of suffering 
and devastation  in my region … but of prospect, prosperity and potential?  
 
Sadly , this is not the only conflict in our world —and some may say that other 
wars are also devastating . But the Palestinian -Israeli conflict remains unique:  
 
- It is t he longest -standing conflict  in the world . ... 
- ... An illegal occupation  of a helpless population by a  self-declared  
‘democratic nation’ . ... 
- ... And a flagrant violation of repeated UN resolutions, international  law, 
and human rights conventions  — a failure that should have elicited  outrage 
and action, especially from major democracies ... instead, it has been met 
with decades of inertia . 
 
My friends,  
 
The war in Gaza marks one of the darkest moments in this institution’s history.  
 
But although it is today’s horror, the injustice stretches back decades.  
 
The Palestinian -Israeli conflict has been on the UN agenda throughout its 
eight decades of existence .  
 
How long  will we be satisfied with condemnation after condemnation without 
concrete action ? 
 
When it comes to the Palestinian -Israeli conflict, it seems that what unfolds 
in the halls of power is theory;  the struggles and suffering on the ground is reality.  
 
For decades , we’ve seen several attempts  to achieve a solution  via interim  
agreements and temporary stopgaps  … none that deliver ed on the end game.  In fact, 
many would argue these processes served as a distraction … as Israel grabbed more 
land, expanded  illegal settlements, demolished homes, and displaced entire 
neighbourhoods.  Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem have been vandalised 
and desecrated by those under government protection.  
 
And throughout all these years, Israeli families , too,  have not been able to live 
in true security. Because military action cannot bring them the safety  they need .  
 
 
Page 3 of 5 No where is that more evident than in Gaza. More than [60] thousand 
Palestinians killed; ... [50] thousand children injured or killed … M iles of burnt -out 
rubble.  Neighbourhoods, hospitals, schools, farms, even mosques and churches, in 
ruins. Widespread  starvation.  
 
And what we are seeing is only a glimpse . Because  never in our modern 
history … has the lens of international media been obstructed like this , from 
capturing the reality on the ground.  
 
Almost two years in, and the cruelty of this military campaign continues 
unabated . 
 
Furthermore, the  current Israeli government ’s provocative calls for a  so-called  
‘Greater Israel’  can only b e realised  through the blatant violation of the sovereignty 
and territorial integrity of its neighbours — and there’s nothing great about that. I 
can’t help but wonder … if a similar outrageous call were made by an Arab leader 
… would it be met with the same global apathy?  
 
The international community must stop entertaining the illusion that this 
government is a willing partner for peace.  
 
Far from it… its actions on the ground are dismantling the very foundations 
on which peace could stand, and intentionally burying the very idea of a Palestinian 
State.  
 
It has shown how little it respects the sovereignty of other countries… as we 
have seen in i ts flag rant violations in Lebanon, Iran, Syria, Tunisia, and most 
recently… Qatar!  
 
And its hostile rhetoric calling for  the targeting  of Al Aqsa Mosque will incite 
a religious war that would reach far beyond the region  and lead to an all -out clash 
that no nation would be able to escape . 
 
How long  before we hold all nations to the same standard s? 
 
How long  before we recogni se the Palestinians as people who aspire to the 
same things you and I do  — and we act on that recognition ? 
 
How long  before we recogni se that statehood is not something Palestinians 
need to earn ? It is not a reward  — it is an indisputable  right.  
 
 
Page 4 of 5 In Jordan , we are determined to work for a world in which people are secure 
in their homes, are safe to  practice their faith s, and are able to live and thrive in 
dignity.  
 
As Custodians of Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, we safeguard 
these holy places against actions that violate the city’s legal and historical status quo.  
 
Compromising  the delicate balance in the Holy City will turn it into a 
tinderbox that ignites global conflict . 
 
And Jordan is serving as the main  base for the international humanitarian 
response in Gaza  ... working by all possible means to provide critical supplies of  aid 
and food. We appreciate our regional and international partners. I am  also immensely 
proud of the many Jordanians — including men and women of the Jordan Armed 
Forces — who are at the heart of this effort:  Ground convoys , aircraft crews , doctors, 
nurses, and mobile medical staff — who work, even under fire, to provide relief .    
 
These, and countless others, carry forward Jordan’s deep heritage of 
compassion and generosity to people in grave need.  
 
My Friends,  
 
Amid such darkness , there is a glimmer on the horizon.  
 
We are seeing more nations stepping up on behalf of a permanent ceasefire in 
Gaza —one that ensures the release of all hostages, unhindered humanitarian aid, and 
support for the Palestinian people as they rebuild.  
 
We all  know that  force is no foundation for security; it is a prelude for greater 
violence. Repeated wars are teaching  generations of Israelis and Palestinians that 
their only recourse… is the gun.  
 
Security will only come when Palestine and Israel begin to co -exist side by 
side.  
 
This is the two -state solution, in line with international law and UN 
resolutions: an independent and viable Palestinian state, with East Jerusalem as its 
capital , ... alongside a secure Isr ael, ... living in peace with its neighbours.  
 
 
Page 5 of 5 For almost a quarter -century, this has been the promise  of the Arab Peace 
Initiative —in which Arab and Muslim partners around the globe extended their 
hand.  
 
 
My friends,  
 
For the past two years, we have finally seen the world’s conscience stirring… 
in the courage of ordinary people from every walk of life , and every corner of the 
globe … raising their voices as one , and declaring it has been too long.  
 
This United Nations must echo that call: It has been too long.   
 
And it must act on that call… until peace is a reality.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 