1 Speech by His Excellency the President of the Lebanese Republic General Joseph Aoun During the general debate of the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly Tuesday September 23, 2025 United Nations Headquarters New York 2 Madam President, Mr. Secretary General Dear colleagues, heads of state and delegations, I stand before you today to talk about peace, development and human rights, while my compatriots are faced with death in their daily lives, that part of my country remains occupied and that my homeland and my people live in adversity and the uncertainty of the future. This situation takes me back 77 years in the past, to the drafting committee of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, when the great Eleanor Roosevelt intervened in a lively debate in support of one of the members of this committee so that “he would not be left alone,” she told her audience. To which the member concerned replied: “Madam, my concern is not to side with the majority or the minority but with the truth. » The author of these words is none other than Charles Malek, the Lebanese philosopher who contributed, along with other great minds of this world, to giving Humanity this eternal declaration. He also had the honor of chairing this assembly from 1958 to 1959 representing my country, Lebanon. Madam President, Mr. Secretary General, Dear colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen, 3 I wanted to commemorate this incident today, for two reasons; firstly to express my immense pride but also my feeling of increased responsibility, as I address you for the first time in my capacity as President of the Lebanese Republic, on the occasion of the 80th anniversary of this great organization. Secondly, because the purpose of our session is to reflect on the inherent relationship between these three virtuous principles which are peace, development and human rights. The Lebanese experience, as well as the lessons learned at the regional and international level, teach us that there can be no development without peace, growth in chaos, or prosperity in the heart of wars and conflicts. Peace being the only breeding ground for development. Furthermore, these same experiences show us that if there cannot be development without peace, it cannot exist without justice. However, justice itself is unattainable without human rights, in particular the fundamental right to live with dignity. Without dignity, peace is an illusion, a dry, oppressive land where only poverty, violence and war grow. Since the founding of this Assembly, of which Lebanon was among the first signatory members in 1945, its charter stipulates: “the determination to preserve future generations from the scourge of war” and the resolution “to practice tolerance, to live in peace with each other in a spirit of good neighborliness. » And “the use of international institutions to promote the economic and social progress of all peoples. » These honorable principles have appeared on the charter of our organization for 80 years while in our daily lives, the blood of our people continues to flow. 4 The reasons for this are multiple. They can be attributed to human nature, or to the dynamics of relations between countries, to conflicts of interest, to hegemony or even to the capitalization of power assets in all areas. However, over the past thirty years, a new factor has come to fuel this situation and more particularly, since from this same platform, people began to talk about a new world order. The main cause arises from the challenges posed by plurality within societies, which manifest themselves in the crisis of identities and ethnicities in the era of globalization. On the one hand, men express a real need to cooperate and integrate, and on the other hand, this same impulse generates a fear that this opening will endanger their national identity. Tragically, this duality has contributed to leading humanity back into conflict. We must recognize here that religion is a primary factor in defining the identities of human groups. In the name of religion thousands have died, in its name borders between countries have been set ablaze, and in its name also several societies have collapsed from within. Furthermore, religion continues to shape the world in very profound ways. While Islamophobia and the fear of the other, of difference, rise in the West, the East remains haunted by the memory of colonization and the remnants of religious wars. Despite remarkable scientific advances, the world finds itself trapped in a bygone era. Madam President, Mr. Secretary General, Dear Colleagues, 5 From the heart of this dilemma emerges the unique role of Lebanon and its significance on the international stage. In the midst of the clash of civilizations, Lebanon appears as a nation where Christians and Muslims coexist as equals but different, in the shadow of a Constitution which guarantees equitable representation for both communities, and a framework of citizenship for all. This model, although criticized by some, offers a unique approach as His Holiness Pope John Paul II described it: “Lebanon is more than a country, it is a message of plurality and freedom” and I wish here to reiterate this message and say: Lebanon is a message of freedom and plurality for the East and the West. In a region where men kill and are killed for their religious belief or even for an ostentatious religious sign, Lebanon appears as a unique, irreplaceable model. In this tormented world, torn between those who want to impose religious dress and those determined to prevent them, Lebanon offers a unique model essential to the region and the entire world. A model that allowed me, the Lebanese Arab, to become the only Christian president in a region stretching from East Asia to the coasts of Europe. My country, this Lebanon, both a land of secularism and deep faith, existing without the coercion of any contract, restriction or imposition of any kind, is in truth a model to be preserved by all those who believe in a better future for Humanity. This begs two essential questions: why should the international community care about preserving Lebanon? And how can this be done? Indeed, safeguarding Lebanon, the only model of coexistence, is a fundamental human duty, since this experience, if it were to disappear, could not be reproduced anywhere else. 6 If the Christian disappears from Lebanon, the equation collapses and his justice disappears. If the Muslim falls, the equation falters and its balance is broken. Thus, the fall of Lebanon, precipitated by the loss of one of its integral components, would favor on both sides of the globe, the rise of all extremism, and physical, moral, even bloody violence. It is clear today that the underlying reasons for the war in Lebanon, as well as the insidious motives that caused it, were intended to destroy this unique model. These actions served to justify an East fractured by rival identities and ethnicities intended to keep the region in a state of permanent conflict. Although some entities can take advantage of this situation, its opposite nevertheless remains in the interest of the world and of humanity which works for global peace. Thus the success of the Lebanese experience would serve as a reference model for all countries. This Lebanon is today a living, resolute, determined and energetic country, refusing to succumb in the face of adversity. To save him, we must simply make a firm commitment, in words and actions, in order to free him from occupation and to ensure the exclusive sovereignty of the Lebanese state over its entire territory, solely through its legal and legitimate armed forces. This has been the unanimous will of the Lebanese since the declaration of November 27, 2024, which was adopted with the support of the United States, France and this same organization, as a mechanism to implement Security Council resolution 1701. 7 I reaffirmed this commitment in my inauguration speech in January 2024, and the government also in its ministerial press release last February. Throughout our negotiations with Tom Barack, President Donald Trump's emissary, we worked to develop a sheet to guarantee stability on our territory. We are committed to this and we expect the parties concerned to commit to it in turn. Lebanon is seeking today what will ensure its preservation. Allow me here to underline with great pride the exceptional character of my country and my people. The Lebanese diaspora, whose members visit Lebanon each year in numbers equivalent to a third of the resident population, constitutes a testament to the attachment of the Lebanese to their motherland. In addition, each major construction site or major project in our region bears a Lebanese signature and not an artistic or cultural event takes place without a Lebanese imprint. In fact I can say with almost certainty that in every significant work there is a Lebanese contribution. Even more, among the members of this distinguished assembly, there are few countries that do not welcome an active, productive and committed Lebanese presence on the ground. The Lebanese integrate harmoniously into their host countries, respecting their laws and customs, while remaining as faithful to their adopted country as to their homeland. We, ladies and gentlemen, are a country capable of embracing modernization and have already undertaken a progressive program for our exit from the economic and financial crisis. It includes an independent financial audit, and provides for the restructuring of the banking sector and the modernization of the administration. We have also undertaken the fight against corruption and organized crime in order to restore the confidence of the Lebanese in their State and the confidence of the world in Lebanon. At the same time, we initiated legislative and institutional reforms, enshrining the independence of the regulatory authorities of the country's productive sectors. We have also consolidated the independence of the judicial system and aligned ourselves with international standards in the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism. Our government also endorsed Lebanon's accession to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, faithful to its historic commitment to the principles of international legitimacy. Just as we are determined to promote public freedoms, to fight against hate speech, and to involve women and men in decision-making. Ladies and Gentlemen, Lebanon’s investment in quality education is centuries-old. Today this investment extends to the knowledge economy. Lebanon, with its invaluable human capital, is at an essential crossroads through which all commercial corridors pass. We are moving forward on all these levels, while our country is buckling under several simultaneous burdens, the most pressing of which remains the instability along our southern border where we demand the immediate cessation of Israeli aggressions, their total withdrawal from all of our occupied territory and the release of our hostages that we 9 have not forgotten. We insist on the full implementation of Security Council Resolution 1701. This can be done with the help of the mandate granted to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in collaboration, for a transitional period, with the Lebanese army in order to restore peace and stability. In this context, allow me to thank the members of the Security Council who voted to renew the mandate of UNIFIL in order to help us restore lasting peace and stability. However, the root causes of our conflict transcend our borders. For this our moral, human and political duty is to put an immediate end to the tragedy unfolding in Gaza. We call for the relaunch of a new political process aimed at finding a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian problem, resulting from the decision of the international community and the principle of the two-state solution - living in security and dignity - as voted by your general assembly by a majority of 142 states, in the New York Declaration. The second burden that we are forced to shoulder is the question of displaced Syrians which is taking place on our soil and which when measured by the number of inhabitants in Lebanon, remains unprecedented, being the largest in history. Lebanon hopes that the United Nations and its specialized agencies as well as the Syrian authorities will provide a solution to this critical situation. Through direct negotiations and with the support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we wish to find agreements and memorandums for all aspects of our bilateral relations. The aim is to ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced Syrian citizens and to restore the special relations, which unite Lebanon and Syria, in good neighborly relations and close cooperation in different areas, thus overcoming all the misunderstandings of the past. 10 The third burden that weighs on us today is the reconstruction of Lebanon, following Israeli aggression on our territory, especially with regard to the infrastructure necessary for the return of Lebanese authority to all border areas. But also, the reconstruction of homes and villages bulldozed and destroyed by aggression, because there can be no stability if they are not rebuilt and their beauty regained. In addition, there remains the question of providing legal armed forces with the means necessary to ensure the defense of the territory and national integrity. We remain confident in public initiatives aimed at organizing international conferences dedicated to this purpose. Ladies and Gentlemen, Lebanon seeks no favors, no privileges. It calls on the international community to act with responsibility, fairness and equality, thus allowing it to recover its role as a land of freedom and plurality. It is this same spirit that motivated this venerable assembly on September 16, 2019, to respond favorably to its request to establish the “Academy of Man for Encounter and Dialogue” on its soil – a decision postponed – eclipsed by the various crises that Lebanon has suffered in recent years. Today, Lebanon is determined to revive this vital initiative. Our commitment consists of reassuring ourselves and sending a message to the world: Lebanon wants to regain its rightful place within the international community and its status among the countries gathered at the United Nations, a platform for human values ​​and the advancement of Humanity. Ladies and Gentlemen, Finally, I wish to return to my opening message, as I stand among you pleading for peace, my compatriots continue to pay with their lives. The struggle remains very fierce between two options: a Lebanon, land of life and joy, radiating these two values ​​to its region and the whole world, or a Lebanon, place of misery and misfortune, spreading the seeds of conflict to the region and the world. We in Lebanon have chosen the first option and are going to commit to it entirely. I appeal to all of you, for peace in our region, as well as for the good of Humanity, stand by us, do not abandon Lebanon.