1 
 Excellencies,  
Distinguished delegates,  
Dear friends,  
 
We are gathered here just a few weeks sh y of the 80th 
anniversary of the foundation  of this United Nations.  
 
Even a glance at the global headlines is enough to produce the 
depressing thought that, perhaps, it should be less of a birthday 
party , and more of a wake  up call . 
 
But firstly, and firmly , I want to reject the idea that the need for 
the U nited Nations  is any less imperative today than it was eight 
decades ago.  
 
Then , as now , you could be forgiven for losing hope.  
 
In 1945, at the end of th at global conflict, the world seemed in 
ruins.  
 
Thankfully, in 2025 , our world isn’t in ruins  …. but too much of it 
is in flames.  
 
2 
 Eighty years ago , the leaders owed it to the tens of millions who 
had lost their lives , over six years of slaughter , to NEVER lose 
hope.  
 
So do we, as leaders today, owe it to every citizen we serve to 
similarly NEVER lose hope.  
 
To NEVER lose sight of the founding principles that brought the 
countries of the world together.  
 
To NEVER allow that which  divides us , to obscure the much 
greater values that unite us.  
 
To NEVER give in  to pessimism or cynicism about what the 
future can hold.  
 
Now, d on’t misunderstand me.  
 
I am no Pollyan na. 
 
I am not blind to the magnitude of the challenges our world face s. 
 
I know that fine words here in New York won’t,  by themselves, 
end conflict , hunger , or the deaths by malnutrition . 
 
3 
 But I remain convinced that the resolution  we show  – and yes , 
the resolutions we pass here - can make a real difference on the 
ground.  
 
We must never lose sight of the power of collective will, and that 
of collective action.  
 
Because while the eight decades of the United Nations have 
seen far too much conflict and suffering ….  
 
They have also seen human progress on a scale even the most 
optimistic of the founding fathers , who dared to dream that 
working together could work to transform the lives of ordinary 
people , would have never imagined . 
 
In 1945 global life expectancy – war aside – hovered in the mid -
forties.  
 
Children  born this year , in 2025, can expect to live into their mid -
seventies .  
 
That didn’t happen by luck or accident.  
 
It happened by will  and resolve . 
 
4 
 It happened by effort.  
 
And, it happened also because of the positive work conducted 
by the agencies of this United Nations . 
 
And it is not just in terms of life chances that the United Nations 
has had a transformative impact.  
 
The values inscribed in the founding charter had a profound 
effect on the journey to self -determination of so many nations , 
like my own.  
 
In 1945 Malta was still a colony, a British military and naval base.  
 
In 2025 Malta is a proud republic, since 1974, playing its part at 
the pivotal crossroads of two continents.  
 
So, the country I am honoured to lead will never turn its back  on 
the possibilities that the principles of our United Nations offer to 
deliver solutions to even the gravest of challenges.  
 
Perhaps , the gravest of those challenges  that our world faces  is  
division.   
 
Barriers are being built , when  they should be coming down.  
5 
  
And those barriers really are already proving obstacles to the 
exchange of trade, innovation, ideas, of hope that our world 
needs.  
 
In thinking about this throwing up of barriers , I thought of some 
words of the late US President Ronal d Reagan.  
 
In his 1985 State of the Union addre ss, he had  said:  
 
“There are no constraints on the human mind, no walls around 
the human spirit, no barriers to our progress except those we 
ourselves erect.”  
 
And who can forget th e FOUR  simple words which changed the 
course of history that President Reagan delivered two years 
later? 
 
When he stood in front of the Berlin Wall and dared to say directly 
to the Soviet Leader …  
 
“Mr Gorbachev…  
TEAR DOWN THIS WALL.”  
 
So, I say to each and every one of my fellow leaders : 
6 
  
LET US TEAR DOWN THE WALLS  TOGETHER !! 
 
Let us dare to say …. the seemingly unsayable . 
 
Let us dare to achieve  …. the seemingly un achievable.  
 
Let us dare to make the changes  needed …. no matter how 
seemingly overwhelming the odds.  
 
We mus t not be afraid to make changes closest to home – in the 
very way the United Nations works.  
 
The biggest threat to the future of our United Nations doesn’t 
come from those who want to tear it down …  
 
But it comes from those who say that in the face of t hat pressure , 
we should barricade ourselves in, and reject the idea of change  
and reforms .  
 
It comes also from those who say that  to admit imperfections and 
weaknesses in the way we work , is to give comfort to those who 
becry and belittle the very idea of the UN …  
 
They couldn ’t be more wrong.  
7 
  
What empowers the opponents  is any hint of an organisation 
with its head buried in sand.  
 
A bunker mentality would be fatal.  
 
The status quo simply isn’t an option.  
 
We need to deliver a UN that is smarter , and fairer.  
 
And we need to accelerate the pace of change to do just that. --- 
 
That change HAS to begin at the top.  
 
I want to pay tribute to the Secretary General and his unwavering 
commitment to the cause of peace.  Thank you Antonio.  
 
But no one can say that the big-power horse trading that has 
marked EVERY SINGLE election of a Secretary General has 
been an edifying sight.   
 
We often reach the right outcome , and that is good  …. but we 
certainly  go the wrong way about it.  
 
We need to do better.  
8 
  
The process to find a worthy successor to Secretary General 
Guterres MUST be a step -change in the way we work.  
 
The selection process needs to be transparent, inclusive , and 
based on merit  - not political bargaining.  
 
The decision must be taken out of the corridors of this building , 
and become a truly global conversation. Involving  ALL member 
states , as well as civil society.  
 
As for the  Security Council  – its make up reflect s the world as it 
WAS in 1945, not as IT IS in 2025.  
 
Malta backs the clamour for expansion, and fairer regional 
representation.  
 
But it isn’t just the composition that needs to change.  
 
The role of the Security Council needs to be elevated . 
 
It must serve as a greater counterbalance to the dominance of 
the larger power s. 
 
9 
 It must be a genuine platform for ALL the nations of the world to 
have our voices heard.  
 
And change needs to come not just to political structures , but to 
the way the UN works.  
 
All around the world – including in Malta – citizens are rightly 
pressing government s to do more with less. Better value for 
money.  
 
The UN, like  any publicly funded organisation, needs to make 
sure that it ruthlessly focuses not on protecting the way things 
are done now , but on the way things can be done  differently  to 
deliver better outcomes for the same investment.  
 
No area of the UN can remain untouched.  
 
No vested interest left untackled.  
 
The UN must embrace digital diplomacy for the A rtificial 
Intelligence  age. 
 
Every system must be streamlined.  
 
Every process scrutinised , to ensure it delivers for the front line . 
10 
  
Every programme assessed against its actual impact.  
 
We shouldn’t be afraid to ensur e that the UN stop s doing things 
it does badly . 
 
And start s doing those things it does well , even better and even 
more efficiently.  
 
Too often , global relations like much of life, can seem merely a 
numbers game.  
 
Of course , the biggest states will always have the loudest voices.  
That is understandable.  
 
But there can be no doubt that small states and developing 
countries are often under -represented and under -heard when 
key decisions are made.  
 
Unless our unique experiences and needs are taken into 
account , we won’t put in place solutions that can actually deliver 
across the WHOLE world.  
 
It is a self -defeating mistake for the ‘big boys club’ to crowd out 
the added value that small nations can bring to the table.  
11 
  
We bring innovation, credibility , and moral authority to any 
concerted global action.  
 
To exclude the small , is to damage the big.   
 
We all lose.  
 
Which is why - although  Malta may be one of the UN’s smallest 
members  in terms of geography - we have always be en 
determined to be one of the UN’s biggest  voices.  
 
Malta remains as committed to the goals of peace, dialogue , 
diplomacy  and global cooperation as we were on th at day in 
1964 w hen w e took our seat amongst these United Nations.  
 
As we ’ve grown as a nation, found our feet on the European and 
world stage , and developed a fast-growing  economy , so too have 
we found our role in the work of the UN.  
 
Small nations , like mine , have t o be realistic about how we can 
add value.  
 
But I firmly  believe  Malta has a combination of three factors that 
make s our country an asset to the global conversation.  
12 
  
Firstly  ---- Malta has a deep commitment to the power of 
multilateral engagement.  
 
We bring to the table the recent experience  of both chairing the 
OSCE and serving on the Security Council  … 
 
Alongside the insight gained from ou r current Presidency of the 
Committee of Ministers  of the Council  of Europe . 
 
I am particularly proud that Malta’s presidency coincides with the 
75th anniversary of the European Convention o n Human Rights.  
 
Rising – like this United Nations – from the ashes of World War 
Two …  
 
Guaranteeing, for  hundreds of millions of Europeans  and other 
peoples , the fundamental human rights for which so many 
people  lost their lives  in their fight for them.  
 
Secondly . Malta offers a unique platform for peace.  
 
We offer a unique mix , that leaves  Malta  particularly well  placed 
to host dialogue and discussion between parties, between 
count ries – no matter how far apart they are.  
13 
  
Our geography - at the crossroads of two continents.  
 
Our neutrality  - enshrined in our Constitution . 
 
Our diplomatic tradition - as a respected and knowledgeable fair-
broker.  
 
Together , they make Malta the ideal location to come together to 
try and find solutions to even the most intractable of disputes.  
 
So, today , I renew my open offer to the warring parties of the 
world and those working to bridge those divides.  
 
Malta stands ready to welcome you, to facilitate , and to support 
you in finding ways forward. --------  
 
Nobody disputes how deeply entrenched are the barriers to 
peace.  
 
But that doesn't mean that the search for solutions should ever 
be paused.  
 
Thinking back to President Reagan.  
 
14 
 When he dared to call for the walls – physical and political – that 
were dividing Europe to be torn down ….  
 
Many dismissed it as an impossible dream.  
 
Unrealistic.  
 
Never going to happen.  
 
But it did  !!! 
 
The seemingly intractable cold war came to an end.  
 
As global leaders , we must equally never give up.  
 
Never say peace can’t be achieved.  
 
Never give into defeatism , even over the most outwardly 
unresolvable of conflicts . 
 
Sadly , on Malta’s doorstep , two such conflicts , wars,  are raging.  
 
Ukraine , and Gaza.  
 
15 
 The world must not turn its back on either , or tackle  them with 
double standards  as this would undermine our credibility  and 
effectiveness . 
 
We must never wring our hands and consign ANY conflict to the 
‘too difficult to deal with’ pile.  
 
It is now three and a half years since Russia ’s unprovoked and  
illegal invasion of  Ukraine.  
 
Malta remains as resolute now as it was then – in demanding a 
lasting and just peace , that guarantees Ukraine’s sovereignty . 
 
That is the only solution which will adhere t o the spirit of both the 
UN Charter and international law.  
 
But that  can only come about following a full and unconditional 
permanent ceasefire , and the full participation of Ukraine in any 
future peace talks  and decision -taking . 
 
Malta stands firmly with our fellow EU members in believing that 
we must keep the strongest possible pressure on the Russian 
economy to force the Russian government to see sense and 
engage in genuine dialogue.  
 
16 
 Slava Ukraini ! ------------  
 
So too must there be an immediate and permanent ceasefire in 
Gaza.  
 
The suffering of so many thousands on innocents civilians must 
come to an  end. NOW !  
 
The remaining hostages must be released immediately  by 
Hamas . 
 
International humanitarian aid must be allowed to flow, without 
impediment. It is so morally wrong , and inhuman,  that so many 
innocent people are dying of hunger and severe malnutrition.  
 
These atrocities must stop NOW. We cannot allow the further 
killing of thousands of innocent people, babies, childre n, youths, 
the elderly and the frail to continue , and turn our heads the other 
way because of other improper considerations .  
 
We cannot remain silent. Decisive and effective action needs to 
be taken  without any further delay .  
 
 
17 
 I cannot bear to see anymore the  physical and psychological 
pain and suffering in the eyes of the children we bring over to 
Malta from Gaza , to give them a better future . Children with 
mutilated bodies who are supposed to  be celebrating the 
innocence of their youth and the best p eriod  of their lives. The 
parents, who have lost their children.  
 
And I ask – WHY?   
 
When leadership should be about humanity and empathy, and 
not about who can inflict the maximum damage to ‘win’ a war, or 
wipe out a nation.  
 
I was proud this week to stand with other world  leaders and add 
Malta to the growing list of allies recognising Palestinian 
statehood.  After tens of years of discussions in Malta, we took 
decisive action.  
 
I owed this to Ibrahim, a fifteen year old icon of the resilience and 
strength of the Palestinian people . Ibrahim  is now receiving  the 
best medical care and prosthetics in Malta after having both his 
legs blown off and severely injured  by a missile fired from a drone  
in Gaza .  
 
18 
 Those are the daily realities in Gaza, and we have to stand up 
and be counted.  
 
Not doing so mean s we are complicit in what is happening.   
 
A viable two -state solution isn’t a ‘reward’ for Hamas . 
 
It is the exact oppo site. 
 
It is the only way to finally banish the evil of Hamas.  
 
It is the ONLY solution that can deliver  the sustainable  and 
peaceful future  that BOTH peoples wish for and deserve.  
 
Of course , the road to a fair two -state solution is a long one, 
fraught with difficulties.  
 
But just because something is hard, doesn’t mean it is 
impossible.  
 
The world owes to Israelis and Palestinians  alike to pursue this 
path to peace.  ---------  
 
Indeed, t he world faces a stark choice.  
 
19 
 In too many areas of life, too many barriers are being erected.  
 
When too many countries pull up the shutters and turn in on 
themselves ….  
 
It is small island nations like Malta that pay the highest price, and 
take the biggest hit . 
 
Let me be clear – security is the first duty of any government.  
 
Being against barriers doesn’t equal being against sensible 
safeguards.  
 
Every nation has the right to take necessary steps to protect 
itself.  
 
But isolation  doesn’t make anyone safer.  
 
Because – as all the evidence of history shows – the greater the 
co-operation across borders  … the greater the protection we can 
offer our citizens.  
 
Any threat to global prosperity is a threat to global security.  
 
20 
 So, I urge the United Nations to redouble its efforts to safeguard 
the connectivity that  trading  nations like Malta rely on.  
 
It is incumbent on us all to resist the trend to protectionism  and 
fight for open  markets.  
 
The alternative  - of a world of trade barriers - will only make us 
all poorer.  
 
Of course, it is equally important that we work to tackle the 
downsides of globalisation, to ensure that none of our citizens 
are left behind.  
 
But there can be no turning back the clock.  
 
We can secure our borders without building fortresses. ---------  
 
Addressing legitimate concern s about migration is not the same 
as pulling up the drawbridge.  
 
Clearly, the current growth of irregular migration is 
unsustainable.  
 
Yet, it will only be TRULY  addressed by a TRULY  global 
response.  
21 
  
A co-ordinated response tha t is both humane and sustainable.  
 
That acknowledges the fundamental truth that migration is driven 
by poverty and conflict , driving migrants to risk their lives at the 
mercy of criminal human smugglers, in search of a better future 
for their families . 
 
Every country has a right to secure borders.  
 
But every country, equally, has a duty to play its part in tackling 
the causes of migration.  
 
You might say – ‘tough on irregular migration, tough on the 
causes of irregular migration .’ 
 
Underpinning all this  is the need for EVERY member of this 
United Nations to recommit to the primacy of international law , 
and the value of international cooperation.  
 
No country – however large, however strategically important – is 
above the rule of law.  
 
Might DOES NOT automatically equal right.  
 
22 
 Small states like Malta cannot afford the risks of a world where 
some ignore the laws when it suits them.  
 
Upholding the Charter , upon which this  United Nations was born 
eight decades ago , isn’t wide-eyed idealism.  
 
For nations like Malta,  it is about our very survival.  
 
Equally vital for the survival of small island nations is the absolute 
necessity of stemming the impact of man -made climate change.  
 
It would be too easy , for a world waylaid by war , to shrug its 
shoulders and claim it lacks the bandwidth to keep taking the 
actions needed to keep down our earth’s temperature.  
 
Malta will keep working  to amplify the voices of all small islands 
across the globe.  
 
As a small island state, w e are at the frontline of r ising 
temperatures and rising sea -levels.  
 
This isn’t some theoretical threat , it is a challenge to our 
existence.  
 
23 
 So, Malta will continue to support indices like COR VI that bring 
home just how vulnerable small island states are to climate 
change.  
 
And we will maintain pressure for greater support to be given to 
those developing small island states , where the threat is highest  
and fastest , but the cost of preparedness disproportionately high . 
 
They must be given the resources they need to adapt.  And the 
adaptation must not cause a financial burden to our citizens, 
otherwise we will lose their buy -in. 
 
And, whilst reaching our climatic targets should of course not be 
put on the back -burner, the competitiveness of our economies 
must also not be put on the back -burner in the pursuit of these 
targets.  Otherwise we will miss the wood for the trees.  
 
Dear friends,  
 
Let me conclude my remarks where I began.  
 
Yes, our world faces unprecedented challenges.  
 
In an age of instant communication , we are all exposed to the 
threats  we all face  like never before.  
24 
  
They can seem utterly overwhelming.  
 
But as a world we face two choices . 
 
We can give up hope, give up trying.  
 
Or we can double down.  
 
Step-in and Step -up. 
 
AND NEVER GIVE UP !!  
 
Multilateralism is MORE important today than it was even in 
1945.  
 
We won’t keep our people s safe, our planet protected , or our 
prosperity preserved UNLESS we work together, listen to each 
other , and ACT in concert.  
 
So, I say to my fellow leaders, of all states, of all sizes ; 
 
TEAR DOWN THESE WALLS !! 
 
Let us stop erecting new barriers !! 
25 
  
Let us knock down th ose existing walls – physical and 
metaphorical – that are standing in the way of progress.  
 
No more posturing.  
 
A lot more partnership.  
 
We owe it to those who had the vision eighty years ago . 
 
We owe it to the people who put their trust in us to lead.  
 
The UN isn’t perfect.  
 
But it is indispensable.  
 
So, let us commit  LOUD and CLEAR  to making it better . 
 
Better focused.  
 
Better value.  
 
Better at tackling the challenges of the next eighty years.  
 
And let that commitment start TODAY.  