Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government, Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of Delegation, Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the distinct honor to deliver to you, on behalf of the sovereign Nigerien people, the greetings and message of His Excellency Army General ABDOURAHAMANE TIANI, President of the Republic of Niger, Head of State. Allow me first of all to extend to you, Madam President, my sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency of this 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly. Niger assures you of its full support in accomplishing your mission. I would also like to salute the commitment and leadership of your predecessor in leading the 79th session. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Before getting to the heart of the matter, I would like to say that Niger supports the speech delivered on behalf of the Confederation of Sahel States, at this same platform, by my brother and friend, SEM Abdoulaye Maiga, Prime Minister of Mali, yesterday September 26, 2025. He thus forcefully expressed the aspirations of our Confederation and its people for respect for our sovereignty, for defense of our interests and sincere cooperation with all countries loving peace and justice. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to solemnly express here the desire of the sovereign people of Niger, through their Government, to maintain friendly and cooperative relations with all Governments and peoples who love peace and justice; this in compliance with the values ​​and principles defined by the Charter of the United Nations, our sovereignty and our interests. How can it be otherwise, when we know that throughout their history, the peoples of the Niger area and the Sahel in general, rich in their great social and cultural diversity, have always been able to draw on their ancestral values ​​to forge centuries-old links and coexist harmoniously among themselves and with their neighbors. Among these values ​​which underpin our social bond, our unity and our common aspirations, figure prominently inter-ethnic mixing and joking kinship, respect for otherness, religious tolerance and solidarity. Throughout our history, we have strengthened the mixing between the Hausa, Zarma, Peulhs, Tuaregs, Kanouris, Gourmantché, Toubous, Arab and Boudouma populations. This mixing allowed us to create blood ties and indestructible alliances between Nigeriens. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, As you can see, the Nigerien people, the people of the Sahel have a great tradition of living together in diversity and solidarity. In the vast expanses of the Sahel with its often austere climate, our peoples very quickly understood the need to organize themselves, to create links, to cooperate with each other to live in peace and security in their shared space. These people have understood that standing together and showing solidarity is not just an option to be stronger, but the condition for their survival. It is for this reason that we naturally support any initiative in the direction of cooperation and international solidarity to achieve our common objectives of peace, development and well-being for all. It is for the same reason that we speak out against any initiative and any action that undermines the efforts of the international community to ensure peace and development. Armed with these principles, the Nigerien people unreservedly condemn the Israeli genocide in Gaza and provide their strongest support for the creation of a sovereign Palestinian state. Just as Niger firmly condemns Israeli aggression against Iran and Qatar and protests against the trivialization of violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan and the Sahel with indifference. totality of the international community; even the complicity of certain powers foreign to the African continent. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Direct actors intervening openly in conflicts are not the only ones responsible for the insecurity and uncertainty that the world is experiencing today. Indeed, Niger also wishes to denounce the inaction of all those who have the means to act in favor of truth and peace, the silence of those whose voices carry, the indifference of selfish people who are ready to destabilize countries and an entire region for their sole interests, the lack of humanism of those who act deviously to sow death among others and the stupidity of the attacks on their homeland and their continent. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Inaction, indifference and complicit silence, on the one hand and on the other hand, sneaky and subversive actions of destabilization, violent campaign of disinformation and informational war; These are the realities that my country and the Confederation of Sahel States (Confederation -AES) face in our fight against imported and sponsored terrorism. Niger in particular has been experiencing this since July 26, 2023, the date from which the sovereign Nigerien people decided to take their destiny into their own hands. We must indeed know the complexity of the drama being experienced in the Sahel, its issues, its ins and outs, to understand not only the play of the different actors, but also the determination of our people and their Governments to fight victoriously to meet the challenge, whatever the sacrifice to be made and the time it will take. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, The usual narrative would be to explain the situation in the Sahel by the fall of Colonel Gaddafi's regime in 2011 and the collapse of the Libyan State which caused the surge of armed groups and the dumping of significant quantities of weapons in our region. Still others evoke the victory of the Algerian people over terrorism in the 1990s -2000s which had the consequence of moving the conflict to the Sahel through terrorist elements having found refuge in the Sahara and part of the Sahel. To this, we must add the indisputable fact that as the armies of foreign Western powers settle into the countries of the Sahel, notably in Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso, supposedly to help them cope, we have witnessed an equally progressive extension and densification of the terrorist phenomenon in the region. Finally, it is also accepted as an indisputable truth that not only are the real and main terrorist leaders not from our Sahelian space but also that they have significant logistical means, a particular mode of operation and display blind and incredible violence which are totally foreign to our geographical and cultural space. Indeed, our countries have certainly experienced in their history and in the still recent past wars in the name of religion and episodes of rebellions, but have never experienced gratuitous and indiscriminate murderous violence of the magnitude of that which we are experiencing today. For all these reasons, you will agree that this is indeed imported terrorism and on purpose. Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, this is also sponsored terrorism. Indeed, the question of terrorist financing as well as the destination of all the resources they have captured for more than a decade really arises. Indeed, how can we understand that terrorists can sustain such a war effort over the long term? In addition, we must note the happy coincidence that the locality of Kidal, a place of retreat for terrorists and other traffickers, was liberated by the Malian army, in the last quarter of the year 2023, at the same time as the French army left Niger. Moreover, the Government of Niger, like the Governments of Mali and Burkina Faso, has regularly brought to the attention of public opinion evidence of the involvement of several foreign powers in the destabilization of the AES countries through the support they provide to terrorists. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, From the top of this rostrum, I would like to denounce France's assumed and claimed support for terrorism in the Sahel and Niger, in particular. Indeed, since the dismissal of its troops from Niger in 2023, as it announced, the Government has put in place a real devious and subversive plan to destabilize my country which consists, among other things: • of informing, training, financing and equipping terrorists; • unfortunate attempts to create the conditions for inter-ethnic conflict in Niger and the Sahel; • in a campaign of disinformation and intoxication to discredit my country, its institutions, its political leaders and its army; • By maintaining and fueling permanent political tension between my country and some of our neighbors. • To this, we must add the unprecedented economic and financial war which consists in particular of France's hateful desire to scuttle all our development projects by demobilizing certain investors and systematically voting against my country at the level of all international financial institutions such as the ADB, the IMF and the World Bank; Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, What is happening today in our Sahel region and in Niger in particular is the result of several factors. First, a colonial liability that has not yet been settled: Nigeriens have never forgotten the particularly unprecedented violence that characterized the colonial occupation. The infamous Voulet and Chanoine mission and other military expeditions were notable for the large-scale death and torture they sowed in Tera, Djoundjou, Doutchi, Konni, Tessaoua and Zinder. Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, From the height of this august rostrum, my country, Niger, addresses the conscience of the world, to point the finger at this hostile force which, since the 19th century has not disarmed, and is still waging a total war against my country today, as evidenced by: The assassination, on November 27, 2021, in Téra, of young demonstrators by the French army, and the threat of military intervention by ECOWAS exploited by France; The abject terrorism sponsored by France which commits heinous crimes in the AES space, notably that of Fambita where, on March 21, 2025, forty-four (44) Muslim faithful were coldly executed while praying; Madam, Ladies and Gentlemen These crimes remind us of those committed by France in Niger since 1899 and which still bleed into our collective memory. In the name of Human Rights, I speak of the innocent victims of the Central Africa Mission, I speak of the towns and villages pillaged and burned, I speak of the carnage of Djoundjou and Lougou, I speak of the martyred towns: - of Kouran Kalgo where the population was entirely exterminated - of Birni N'Konni where more than 7,000 dead were thrown into mass graves, I speak on behalf of pregnant women disembowelled and fetuses thrown to scavengers, I speak in the name of raped women and hanged little girls. I speak in the name of the men shot and the resistance fighters beheaded. On behalf of my country, Niger, I solemnly ask France to remember and recognize its crimes. On this subject, the Government of Niger has set up a Commission of experts, academics and scientists to study this dark period of our history and write the true history of our country in order to reestablish the facts, reclaim our rights. our history and give our great people all their dignity. Then, the plundering of our resources, to the detriment of Nigeriens and the environment. Indeed, half a century of exploitation, Uranium has brought to the Nigeriens nothing but misery, pollution, rebellion, corruption and desolation and to the French prosperity and power. Also, since the advent of the CNSP and Niger's decision to exercise its sovereignty over its resources, the French Government, in disarray, has sought to drag us into endless trials to stop the exploitation of our ore. Finally, France's control over Nigerien political life and the presence of French troops in Niger. Indeed, until July 26, 2023, France has always considered Niger as part of its territory or even its property. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would however like to say forcefully that far from breaking our momentum, the adversity we are facing has strengthened our determination to fight terrorists and their sponsors until final victory. Also, we can already rejoice in certain structuring results achieved. What the Nigerien people have succeeded in since July 26, 2023 with the CNSP taking power, is to put our country on a new trajectory which this time brings hope. What we have succeeded in is removing from our country, without hatred or violence, the forces which hindered our sovereignty and prevented our Defense and Security Forces from gaining strength to effectively accomplish their missions. What we have succeeded in is denouncing all unfair contracts, legislative texts, treaties and conventions which are not in the interest of Niger. It is a strong signal for all those who are used to or intend to plunder Niger that from now on our country will defend its interests without complacency. What we have achieved is the assertion of our sovereignty over our natural resources long despoiled and plundered by foreign powers and their local lackeys; What we have achieved is the unity of our people on issues of national interest. From now on, all Nigerians are looking in the same direction; one that preserves the best interests of our country. Nigeriens have understood that the battle being fought is a collective question; hence the spontaneous emergence of a new popular motto: Labou Sanni No en Zarma; Zanchin Kassa born in Hausa; Haala Leydi No, in Fulfuldé, which means: it is a national issue. What we have succeeded in is reawakening the patriotism of Nigeriens, long trampled underfoot by individuals serving personal, partisan and clan interests or, worse, in the pay of mafia organizations or foreign powers. What we have achieved is the sincere support of the population for the Government who are now united to put the country on the path to development. What we have succeeded in is proving that Niger can stand up, bravely and successfully face terrorism, ensure its sovereignty expenditures, make investment expenditures, in short, live, without the so-called foreign assistance often used to threaten or humiliate Nigeriens. What we have achieved is that for the first time in the history of our country, the decisions that bind Niger and its people are taken in Niger, by Nigeriens and in the interest of Niger and nowhere else. This is also what has enabled us, with full responsibility and despite the difficult context we are experiencing, to take social measures that are both symbolic and strong, including, among others: the reduction in pump prices of gasoline and gas, the reduction in the costs of certain medical and surgical procedures, the reduction in school fees and support for the price of certain primary foodstuffs. need. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, As you can see, Niger has embarked on a new dynamic of governance. This approach was consolidated by the national meetings held in Niamey from February 15 to 20, 2025, having brought together all the vital forces of the nation. These meetings resulted in the adoption of important recommendations and the development of a Charter of Refoundation. They also made it possible, in accordance with the Charter, to gradually establish our institutions: the Consultative Council for Refoundation, the State Court, the Court of Auditors, the Commission for the Fight against Economic, Financial and Fiscal Delinquency (COLDEFF), the National Communication Observatory, the Public Order Regulatory Authority. Then, on the diplomatic level, Niger not only expanded its diplomatic map with the opening of several diplomatic representations and consular posts, but also redefined the framework of its cooperation with its partners. This framework is now based on absolute respect for our sovereignty, our strategic choices and the legitimate aspirations of the Nigerien people. Likewise, Niger has also engaged in a vast agricultural production program aimed at ensuring food self-sufficiency for its hardworking populations, through the development of thousands of hectares of arable land through large-scale irrigation. The results we have achieved are encouraging in one year of implementation. Indeed, for the first time in its recent history, the country is not experiencing a lean period; period during which assistance from the international community is systematically requested. Our ambition is for Niger to achieve its food sovereignty: inch’Allah, Niger will no longer ask for food aid to feed its populations. On the economic front, despite the unfair sanctions imposed on Niger and the economic and financial blockade that France is trying to put in place against our country, we have courageously maintained the course of macroeconomic reforms which have resulted in particular: in inflation under control, at -0.1% at the end of August 2025 and we expect economic growth in real terms of around 7% over the period 2025 -2028. In addition, our budget deficit which was 5.4% of GDP in 2023 will be contained at 3% at the end of 2025. Finally, considerable efforts are being made to improve our debt profile. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Regarding the issue of human rights, Niger reaffirms its attachment to the international legal instruments to which it is a party. However, he strongly denounces the differentiated and selective approach observed in the application of the principles of human rights by certain countries with the sole aim of damaging the image of our States. Also, I would like to announce in person that Niger and all the countries of the AES Confederation, deeply attached to respect for human dignity and the development of their populations, do not accept any lessons in this matter from any entity whatsoever. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Faced with these security, diplomatic and development challenges, Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger have made the historic decision to create a strategic alliance which is the confederation of Sahel States. In this framework, we coordinate our policies and build our future together with our own ideas and our own development models based on our ancestral values, in a space which will very soon, inch’Allah, be free of all forms of threats. Allow me to conclude Madam President by assuring you that within the AES Confederation, we are acting resolutely, both individually and collectively, to strengthen our common security in the concert of nations. And, to also say very clearly that contrary to what is sometimes conveyed, the AES Confederation and its member states, in particular Niger, remain open to other organizations and other countries. However, this openness cannot be to the detriment of our legitimate aspirations, namely respect, sovereignty, the protection of our populations and the defense of our interests. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, To conclude my remarks I would say that Niger, a thousand-year-old land on the borders of the Sahara, faces, due to its history and geography, multiple adversities: - The effects of climate change, droughts followed by floods which make the lives of our farmers and breeders more and more precarious. - The poverty of our populations and the maintenance of many of our youth in need, despite the wealth of our subsoil long exploited by shameless foreign powers. - Terrorism, encouraged and financed by Western powers every time we denounce the leonine agreements that they make their local lackeys sign to continue to exploit our resources as they wish. This orchestrated terrorism leaves our cities in mourning, drains our countryside of its resources by sowing terror and deprives our rural populations of schools and medical care. But, Niger together with the two other countries of the AES are in the process of being reborn and the refoundation is today underway under the leadership of our 3 Heads of State and by the firm will of its people, determined to take control of their destiny. The Refoundation underway in Niger is not a break with the international community, but the solemn affirmation of our sovereignty, our dignity and our inalienable right to choose our partnerships for the well-being of our children. - Our top priority remains safety. The fight against terrorism that we have undertaken, we are doing for ourselves, for our region, and for the stability of the entire world. Because we have understood that we can only count on our own forces and not on a powerless UN, hampered by the veto rights of Western countries. - The rebuilding of Niger also requires economic progress, through judicious and responsible exploitation of our immense and varied natural resources. It is time for this wealth to benefit our people more. In this regard, we are committed to virtuous governance and we invite international investors who wish to support us in a win-win partnership. We extend our hand to all countries around the world who believe in a partnership based on mutual respect, justice and solidarity. - Refoundation is also and above all ensuring security and food self-sufficiency in our country. In this regard, the Government of Niger is banking on agro-ecology and large-scale irrigation. Relying on our own resources remains the credo of the Head of State, General of the Army Abdourahmane Tiani Madam President We still believe in multilateralism as a way to meet global challenges. However, this multilateralism must be reformed to be more inclusive and fairer. Africa must have its rightful place in international decision-making bodies, including the Security Council. Dr. AES's voice must be heard when discussing world peace. Let's work together to build a more resilient world. A world where security is not the privilege of a few powers, but the right of all countries, large or small. A world where the opinion of each nation counts without any discrimination and where the cries of the people are heard. Thank you for your kind attention.