 1  
REPUBLIC OF NAURU  
 
National Statement delivered by His Excellency Hon. David W.R. Adeang, M.P.  
President of the Republic of Nauru  
80th session of the United Nations General Assembly  
 
Tuesday  23rd September 2025  
UNHQ, New York, USA  
 
Check against delivery  
 
Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,  
 
It is an honor to address this Assembly on behalf of the people and 
government of the Republic of Nauru — a small island nation committed to 
peace, prosperity, and a sustainable future for all.  
 
It is a lso a  great privilege to speak as the first leader from the Pacific at this 
80th session.  As Nauru stands at a defining moment in its democratic journey, 
we are guided by this year ’s theme: that we are, indeed, better together. This 
conviction shapes my remarks today, as I share Nauru ’s perspective on the 
urgent challenges before us and the collective action they demand.  
 
 
 
 
Peace, Unity, and Global Solidarity  
 

 2 Mr. President,  
 
We gather at a time when the world faces unprecedented challenges to 
peace and security. Nauru stands firmly against war and conflict, believing 
that dialogue and diplomacy must always prevail over division.  
 
The principles enshrined in the UN Charter —peace, human rights, and 
international cooperation —remain our guiding light. Nauru may not have 
military might, but we have moral authority earned through our commitment 
to peaceful coexistence and multilateral so lutions.  
 
We call upon all nations to choose unity over discord, cooperation over 
conflict and shared prosperity as the foundation for addressing our common 
challenges.  
 
Economic Resilience and Partnerships  
 
Mr. President,  
 
Small island developing states face a fundamental challenge: breaking 
cycles of dependency that constrain our growth and threaten our economic 
sovereignty.  
 
Nauru’s strategy is simple: invest in our people —they are our greatest asset 
and the foundation of our future. Education, healthcare, and opportunity keep 
our communities strong, our youth engaged, and our nation moving forward. 
This principle guides every  partnership we form and every initiative we 
undertake.  
We are deeply grateful to Australia, whose steadfast support goes beyond 
diplomacy and partnership. Australia’s friendship has long been central to 
 3 Nauru’s journey. Ours is a relationship grounded in kinship, trust, and the ties 
of Pacific family. As we say in Nauru,  Ata Amin Bwini ---which means, we are 
family .  
 
We also value our productive relationship with the People’s Republic of 
China and reaffirm our commitment to the One -China Principle. China’s 
partnership has contributed meaningful opportunities for infrastructure, 
trade, and development that support Nauru ’s progress . 
 
For Nauru, these diverse partnerships, built on mutual respect and 
understanding, are the foundation of our progress at home.  
 
Our economic resilience strategy is centered around the Intergenerational 
Trust Fund —which safeguards national wealth for the benefit of future 
generations —the Economic and Climate Resilience Citizenship Program, 
the Command Ridge Virtual Asset Authority, Deep Seabed Mineral 
Resources, and our pursuit of Egmont Group membership. Through these 
initiatives, we are diversifying our economy, creating transparent revenue 
streams, and ensuring that today’s progress benefits those yet to come.  
 
As we look ahead, we must come together in the spirit of cooperation that 
defines this 80th session.  
 
 
 
Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI)  
 
Mr. President,  
 4  
For small island nations like Nauru, our vulnerability goes far beyond income. 
It’s the daily reality of disrupted supply chains, narrow economic choices, 
geographic isolation, and the outsized impacts of crises we cannot control.  
 
By conventional measures, Nauru ’s national income suggest s we have 
surpassed certain thresholds. But income alone fails to capture our fragility 
— the isolation, climate pressures, and economic shocks that shape our 
reality.  
 
We commend the United Nations for advancing the Multidimensional 
Vulnerability Index. The MVI reflects what our experience shows: that 
vulnerability is about exposure to shocks and capacity to respond  matter 
more than income alone.  
 
This week ’s First Biennial Summit provides a n opportunity to strengthen 
collaboration between the UN and multilateral institutions. Such collaboration 
should establish the MVI as the benchmark for determining eligibility for 
development support, concessional finance, and technical assistance.  
 
We therefore urge the UN, in partnership with member states and 
development partners, to fast -track the MVI ’s implementation , and ask all 
development partners to embrace this essential evolution — one that brings 
fairness and realism to global development policy.  
 
Nauru stands ready to work with all partners in reali sing this vision. Let us 
not let a statistic determine who gets left behind.  
Climate Change  (Adaptation – HGI & PRF):  
 
Mr. President,  
 5  
The United Nations has recognized what is self -evident to Nauru: climate 
change is not just an environmental crisis it is a direct threat to our peace, 
our security, and the very survival of our nation. The International Court of 
Justice has issued an Advi sory Opinion of profound moral and political 
significance, echoing the urgent warnings of our region.  
 
We are approaching COP30, and yet small island developing states still face 
unacceptable barriers to climate finance. Despite countless pledges, those 
least responsible continue to struggle most to access the resources urgently 
needed for adaptation and mitigation.  Simply put, the time for debate has 
passed. Concrete climate action cannot be postponed any longer.  
 
That is why we have placed special hope in our Higher Ground Initiative —to 
build climate -resilient communities on elevated land, powered by renewable 
energy and sustainable water systems —and in the Pacific Resilience 
Facility. The PRF, an innovative Pacifi c-led initiative , is designed to deliver 
much -needed financing directly to communities on the front lines of climate 
change in the Pacific. By pooling resources and investing in local adaptation, 
the PRF represents a new model for building lasting resilien ce across our 
pacific region.  
 
 
Nauru calls on our partners to continue to stand with our Pacific family. We 
also welcome others who wish to join us and invite all friends of the Pacific 
to work alongside us in building a more resilient future for our region. Both 
the HGI and t he PRF are not charity; they are  sound investment s in stability, 
 6 security, and sustainability for communities on the front lines of climate 
change. Let us move beyond pledges and deliver real protection and hope 
for our people, the Pacific, and the generations to come.  
 
Deep Seabed Minerals  
 
Mr. President,  
 
The International Seabed Authority faces the complex challenge of balancing 
competing priorities while fulfilling its mandate. Nauru speaks directly today 
because the urgency of this issue requires clarity, not just diplomacy.  
 
Nauru has faced several criticism s for its decisions  within the ISA . These 
criticisms, however, miss the point. The true focus should be on ensuring the 
ISA fulfills its mandate to the common heritage of humankind; the exercise 
of legitimate member state rights is essential to holding the Authority 
accountable and prompting  it to fulfill that mandate.  
 
As both a small island developing state and a sponsoring state for deep 
seabed mineral exploration, Nauru has invested significantly through our 
sponsored entity to access minerals essential to powering the world ’s 
transition away from fossil fuels and advancing the common heritage of 
humankind.  
 
We have consistently advocated for robust regulations that balance 
responsible mineral recovery with effective environmental protection. When 
Nauru invoked the two -year rule, we did so in good faith, expecting the 
 7 multilateral system to fulfill its treaty obligations in the same spirit. Yet, 
negotiations remain polarized, and the timely adoption of the regulations 
appears increasingly elusive.  
 
The choice before us is clear: either we source these critical minerals 
responsibly through strong regulatory frameworks, or we continue to give in 
to delay . 
 
While we remain committed to advancing the multilateral framework, Nauru 
welcomes all nations ’ growing recognition of seabed minerals ’ importance. 
This includes President Trump ’s recent decision, through the 2025 Executive 
Order , to advance seabed mineral exploration and development. Nauru is 
committed to working with the United States to maximize  cooperation in this 
sector. For Nauru, seabed minerals represent more than economic 
diversification —they are a pathway to resilience and a chance to contribute 
to global solutions. The polymetallic nodules found in our sponsored areas 
are vital for renewable energy that support the green transition.   
 
Nauru urges the ISA to work with renewed purpose to fulfill its mandate 
without delay for the adoption of the draft exploitation regulations.  
 
 
 
A Voice for the Vulnerable  
 
Mr. President,  
 
 8 After eighty years of multilateralism, our greatest challenge is evolving 
existing frameworks to address the realities of today  — with recognition, 
resources, and partnership.  
 
The UN80 Initiative offers an opportunity to strengthen the UN ’s ability to 
respond effectively to the complex challenges faced by vulnerable countries 
like Nauru. We urge that ongoing reforms operationalize the Special 
Circumstances of SIDS as a guiding principle, embedding recognition of our 
unique vulnerabilities i n institutional procedures, financing mechanisms, and 
decision -making processes.  
 
As we look to strengthen multilateral frameworks, we must also address 
practices that undermine them. Standing with vulnerable nations, Nauru calls 
on the international community to end unilateral economic measures that 
deepen vulnerabilities and limit development oppor tunities. We encourage 
dialogue on long -standing economic measures including those affecting 
Cuba to ensure they support rather than hinder the development aspirations 
that the UN Charter and this Assembly seeks to achieve.  
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion: Better Together for the Future  
 
Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,  
 
 9 History will not judge us by our words, but by the future we build —by whether 
we choose unity over division, peace over conflict, and shared humanity over 
selfishness.  
 
The theme before us — “Better Together ”—calls on us to protect the 
vulnerable, build resilient economies, and safeguard the planet for those who 
will follow . 
 
On behalf of the Republic of Nauru, I reaffirm our unwavering commitment 
to the United Nations and the vision of a just, peaceful, and sustainable 
world.  
 
For the sake of our children, our planet, and our common humanity, let us 
stand together —not as divided nations, but as one family determined to build 
a brighter tomorrow.  
 
May God bless the Republic of Nauru, and may God bless the United 
Nations.  
 
Mwa tubwa kor . I thank you.  
 