  
 
 
 
Address by the Prime Minister at the General
the 80th Session of the UN General Assembly
(
1 Address by the Prime Minister at the General
the 80th Session of the UN General Assembly
 
 
(26 September, 2025)  
 
 
*** 
 
Address by the Prime Minister at the General  Debate of 
the 80th Session of the UN General Assembly  New York 

2  Madam President, 
Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
ASSALAM-O-ALAIKUM, 
 
I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the 
Presidency of the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly, 
and thank Mr. Philemon Yang, for his stewardship of the previous 
Session. 
 
I also commend Secretary-General António Guterres, for his bold 
leadership of the United Nations in testing times. 
 
My fellow leaders, 
 
Today is the third time I have had the honor of speaking to this 
august Assembly, as Prime Minister of Pakistan. 
 
Our world is more complex today, than ever before: 
 
 Conflicts are intensifying; 
 International law is being brazenly violated; 
 Humanitarian crises are multiplying; 
 Terrorism remains a potent threat; 
 Disinformation and fake news undermine trust; 
 Unrestrained arms race, and emerging technologies, aggravates 
risks of catastrophic miscalculation; and, above all; 
 Climate change threatens our very survival. 
 
Multilateralism is no more an option; it is essential. 
 
While we welcome the “Pact for the Future” and the “UN80 Initiative”, 
mere declarations are not enough. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
Pakistan’s foreign policy, guided by the vision of Quaid-e-Azam 
3  Muhammad Ali Jinnah – is based on peace, mutual respect, and 
cooperation. 
 
We believe in the peaceful settlement of disputes, through dialogue 
and diplomacy. 
 
Last year, from this very podium, I had warned that Pakistan would 
act most decisively against any external aggression. Those words proved 
true, when, in May this year, my country confronted unprovoked 
aggression from our eastern front. The enemy came shrouded in 
arrogance; we sent them back in humiliation. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
India sought to extract political gains from a human tragedy, by 
spurning my offer of an independent investigation into the Pahalgam 
incident. Instead, it attacked our cities, and targeted our innocent 
civilians. When our territorial integrity and national security were 
violated, our response was in accordance with the inherent right of self-
defense, under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. 
 
Our valiant armed forces, under the stellar leadership of Field 
Marshal Syed Asim Munir, mounted an operation of stunning 
professionalism and bravery. Repulsing the enemy’s attack, under Air 
Chief Marshal Zaheer Babar Sidhu, our falcons took flight and etched 
their answer across the skies resulting in seven of the Indian jets turned 
to scrap and dust—a decisive response to the aggressor that will echo 
through the annals of history. 
 
To the fearless architects of this victory, to every officer and soldier, 
heirs of our martyrs—their names are forever engraved in glory. To the 
mothers of our martyrs, their courage guides our path forward and their 
sacrifice shall never be in vain, Insha’Allah. And to every Pakistani, you 
stood as one unbreakable wall, a Bunyan Um Marsoos. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
Though in a position of strength, Pakistan agreed to a ceasefire, 
4  facilitated by President Donald Trump’s bold and visionary leadership. 
We express our deep appreciation to him and his team for their active 
role in bringing about the ceasefire. President Trump’s efforts for peace 
helped avert a more threatening war in South Asia. Had he not 
intervened timely and decisively, the consequences of a full-fledged war 
would have been catastrophic. 
 
We are also grateful to our friends and partners including China, 
Turkiye, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Azerbaijan, Iran, UAE, and the UN 
Secretary-General, for extending their diplomatic support to Pakistan at 
this crucial time. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
We have won the war and now we seek to win peace! Pakistan 
stands ready for a composite, comprehensive and result-oriented 
dialogue with India on all outstanding issues. South Asia requires 
“proactive”, rather than “provocative” leadership! 
 
India’s unilateral and illegal attempt to hold the Indus Waters 
Treaty in abeyance defies the provisions of the Treaty itself, as well as the 
norms of international law. Pakistan has made it abundantly clear—and 
let there be no doubt—we will definitely, and ardently defend the 
inalienable right of our 240 million people on these waters. To us, any 
violation of this treaty represents an act of war. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
This latest Indian aggression serves as a stark reminder of the 
dangerous flashpoint between two nuclear armed rivals—the Jammu and 
Kashmir dispute. 
 
For nearly eighty years, India has tried to muzzle the voices of the 
brave sons and daughters of Kashmir. Thousands of widows, orphans 
and the elderly seek answers from all of us. When will their misery end? 
Who will provide them justice? Why is the international community still 
silent? Do the Kashmiris have no human rights? 
 
5  Through this august house, I wish to assure the Kashmiri people, 
that I stand with them, the people of Pakistan stand with them, and 
soon, one day, Insha’Allah, India’s tyranny in Kashmir will come to an 
end! Kashmir will gain its inalienable right to self-determination through 
an impartial plebiscite under the auspices of the United Nations. 
 
The plight of the Palestinian people is one of the most heart- 
wrenching tragedies of our times. This prolonged injustice is a stain on 
the global conscience, and our collective moral failure. For nearly eighty 
years, the Palestinians have courageously endured Israel’s brutal 
occupation of their homeland. 
 
In the West Bank, each passing day brings new brutality, illegal 
settlers who terrorize and kill with impunity. And in Gaza, Israel’s 
genocidal onslaught has unleashed unspeakable terror upon women and 
children in a manner we have not witnessed in decades, perhaps ever. In 
blind pursuit of its nefarious goals, the Israeli leadership has unleashed 
a shameful campaign against the innocent Palestinians, which history 
will always remember as one of its darkest chapters. 
 
But speak we must, Madam President. Our words are too little too 
late for Hind Rajab — a child, nay, a little baby. We have all heard her 
trembling voice on that phone call, which little Hind made as she 
struggled to stay alive under Israeli onslaught. 
 
Can you imagine that little girl—Hind Rajab—as if she was your 
daughter? Can you imagine not having the compassion to spare her life? 
My agony, and the agony of the entire Muslim Ummah, indeed, I think 
the agony of all nations on the planet is that we failed Hind Rajab. 
 
As they say, “the smallest coffins are the heaviest to carry.” I for 
one would know, for I too carried the tiny coffin of a seven-year-old Irtaza 
Abbas, during the recent confrontation with India. 
 
We cannot—we must not—fail these children of Gaza, or any child 
anywhere—we must find a path to a ceasefire. 
 
Pakistan firmly supports the demand of the Palestinian people for 
6  the establishment of a sovereign Palestinian state, with pre-1967 
borders, and Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Palestine can no longer 
remain under Israeli shackles. It must be liberated! 
 
Excellencies, 
 
Pakistan was among the first to recognize Palestinian statehood in 
1988. We welcome the recognition of the State of Palestine by a number 
of countries recently and urge others to also follow suit. 
 
We are further grateful for President Trump’s timely initiative to 
invite Arab-Islamic states for a consultative session at the United 
Nations. It has rekindled hope for a ceasefire in the near future for which 
the credit must again be attributed to his quest for peace. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
Israel’s recent attack on Doha, and its continued violations of the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of numerous countries is reflective of 
its rogue behavior. Pakistan stands with the brotherly people of Qatar. 
We also support all efforts for a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine 
conflict, in line with the UN Charter, to end human suffering and global 
turmoil caused by this protracted war. 
 
Madam President, 
 
Pakistan condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
For over two decades, Pakistan has been at the frontline of global 
counter-terrorism efforts—having suffered over 90,000 casualties and 
endured over 150 billion USD in economic losses. 
 
Today, we face externally sponsored terrorism, particularly from 
foreign-funded groups, such as the TTP, Fitna al-Khawarij, Fitna al-
Hindustan, BLA and its Majeed Brigade. Operating from Afghan soil, 
these groups are responsible for some of the most heinous attacks inside 
Pakistan, including the dastardly Jaffar Express incident earlier this 
year. 
 
7  Our brave security forces continue to combat this threat, and we 
will continue this fight till the last terrorist is neutralized, and the last 
proxy has been eliminated. 
 
As an immediate neighbor, Pakistan has a direct stake in a 
peaceful Afghanistan. We believe that the key to development and 
prosperity lies in regional stability and connectivity. Pakistan continues 
to engage with all partners to extend humanitarian assistance, promote 
economic recovery, and encourage an inclusive political framework in 
Afghanistan. The Interim Afghan Government must, however, uphold 
human rights, including women’s rights. Above all, we expect the IAG to 
take effective action against terrorist groups and to ensure that Afghan 
soil is not used for terrorism against any country. 
 
Madam President, 
 
Global peace, harmony and shared prosperity can best be advanced 
through dialogue, tolerance and understanding. There must be no space 
for hate speech, discrimination or violence against any person, or against 
any religion. Hate-driven ideologies, such as India’s Hindutva-driven 
extremism, pose a danger to the entire world. While there is growing 
recognition of the dangers posed by Islamophobia, the imperative of 
effectively combating this menace can hardly be overemphasized. 
Pakistan welcomes the appointment of a UN Special Envoy to combat 
this scourge. 
 
Madam President, 
 
While we are confronted with the climate crisis, it demands the 
most urgent collective action. In 2022, Pakistan had endured massive 
floods that caused significant losses amounting to USD 34 billion. This 
year again, we are dealing with another mega flood, with thousands of 
villages washed away, millions of people displaced, more than a 
thousand killed and billions of dollars of crop, livestock and property lost 
to floodwaters. Our nation stands united in these testing times and we 
are dealing with this natural calamity with remarkable resilience. I have 
declared a climate emergency to cope with this challenge. 
 
8  The catastrophic floods of 2022 and 2025 are glaring examples of 
loss and damage caused due to climate change. Pakistan contributes less 
than 1% of global emissions annually, yet it continues to face the 
relentless brunt of climate disasters. Pakistan is among the top 10 most 
vulnerable countries bearing the brunt of this challenge. Nevertheless, 
we are enhancing our climate resilience, and concurrently expanding the 
use of clean energy. 
 
Our commitment to ambitious climate action is reflected in our 
Third Nationally Determined Contribution. However, while Pakistan is 
doing its part, those most responsible for the climate crisis must deliver 
on climate finance commitments, to support climate action in developing 
countries. 
 
Pakistan is fully committed to the 2030 Agenda. Our national 
development strategies are aligned with the SDGs. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
While we deal with climate change, I bear good tidings on the 
domestic economic front. Socio-economic development and the welfare of 
our people are among my government’s foremost priorities. We have 
successfully implemented deep-rooted structural macro-economic 
reforms, modernized and broadened our taxation system, intensified 
efforts to mobilize productive investment, and embraced digitization, AI 
and crypto as the tools of the future. 
 
Infrastructure, energy, industry, agriculture, mining and 
technology are priority areas for us. Strategic partnerships, including our 
All-Weather Cooperation with China, through the China-Pakistan 
Economic Corridor under President Xi Jinping’s landmark Belt and Road 
Initiative—are contributors to our progress. 
 
I admire the vision and foresight of President Xi Jinping, whose 
recently launched Global Governance Initiative, along with other global 
initiatives, offers a comprehensive framework for a more just and 
inclusive development. 
 
9  Excellencies, 
 
As a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council, Pakistan 
is playing its constructive role in conflict prevention. The unanimous 
adoption of Resolution 2788, under our Presidency of the Council, has 
renewed our collective commitment to multilateralism, respect for the UN 
Charter and effective implementation of UN Security Council resolutions. 
 
Pakistan will continue to advocate a stronger and reformed UN 
peacekeeping, and the peacebuilding architecture. 
 
Madam President, 
 
Pakistan supports a United Nations that is more effective, more 
credible and more representative. In particular, we are committed to a 
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, that reflects the interests 
of all Member States. The Council’s credibility is damaged by paralysis 
and selectivity. Adding more permanent members will only compound 
this problem. 
 
Excellencies, 
 
At the end, let me assure you, that Pakistan will always stand for 
peace, justice, and development—for a reinvigorated UN, and for 
cooperative multilateralism, that is fair and inclusive, and delivers for all. 
 
Let this 80th anniversary not simply ‘commemorate’ history. Let us 
‘make’ history and chart a future—for the next 80 years—with these 
United Nations, as humanity’s enduring hope for global good. 
 
Let us truly strive to become “Better Together.” 
 
I thank you. 