English Translation (Original: Arabic)  
Statement  of H.E. President Mahmoud Abbas  
President of the State of Palestine  
Before the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
New York, 25 September 2025  
 
H. E. Annalena Baerbock, President of the General Assembly,  
H.E. António Guterres, Secretary -General of the United Nations,  
Excellencies, distinguished Heads of State and delegations,  
Peace, mercy, and blessings of God be upon you,  
I speak to you today after nearly two years in which our Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip 
have been facing a war of genocide , destruction, starvation, and displacement waged by 
the Israeli occupation forces. This war has killed and wounded more than 220,000 
Palestinians, the majority of them children, women, and elderly civilians, displaced 
hundreds of thousands, prevented the delivery of food and medicine, and starved two 
million Palestinians.  
A suffocating siege has been imposed on an entire people, destroying more than 80% of 
homes, schools, hospitals, churches, mosques, and infrastructure. What Israel is carrying 
out is not just aggression —it is a war crime and a crime against humanity, witnessed and 
documented , and it will be recorded in history books and in the conscience of humanity as 
one of the most horrific chapters of human tragedy in the 20th and 21st centuries.  
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the capital of the State of Palestine, the 
extremist Israeli government continues implementing colonial policies through illegal 
settlement expansion and annexation projects, the latest being the construction pla n in E1, 
which aims to divide the West Bank, isolate occupied Jerusalem from its surroundings, and 
destroy the two -state solution, in blatant violation of international law and relevant UN 
Security Council resolutions, foremost among them Resolution 2334.  
This is in addition to the Israeli Prime Minister’s announcement of his so -called “Greater 
Israel” plan, which we categorically reject and condemn, as it even includes expansion into 
sovereign Arab States. We also condemn the recent brutal attack against the fraternal State 
of Qatar, which we consider a dangerous escalation and a flagrant violation of international 
law requiring decisive intervention and deterrent measures against such expansionist 
schemes.  
With official encouragement and growing impunity, settler terrorism is escalating: settlers 
burn homes and fields, uproot trees, attack villages, assault unarmed Palestinian civilians, 
and even kill them in broad daylight under the protection of the Israel i occupation army.  
Holy places —Muslim and Christian alike —in Jerusalem, Hebron and the rest of the West 
Bank, and Gaza Strip have not been spared from assaults and violations, targeting 
mosques, churches, and cemeteries in a blatant transgression of the legal and historical 
status quo and in clear violation of international law.  
Despite all that our people have suffered, we reject what Hamas carried out on October 
7th—acts that targeted Israeli civilians and took them as hostages —because such actions 
do not represent the Palestinian people nor their just struggle for freedom and 
independence.  
We have affirmed —and will continue to affirm —that Gaza is an integral part of the State of 
Palestine, and that we are ready to assume full responsibility for governance and security 
there. Hamas will have no role in governance, and it, along with other fac tions, must hand 
over their weapons to the Palestinian National Authority within the framework of building 
the institutions of one state, one law, and one legitimate security force. We reiterate that we 
do not want a militarized  state.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Our wounds are deep, our catastrophe immense. Seven million Palestinians still endure 
the trauma of the Nakba and displacement since 1948. Our people in the West Bank, 
including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza continue to suffer decades of occupation and 
aggression: killings, arrests, settlement expansion, theft of land and resources, without 
deterrent or accountability.  
For decades our people have endured oppression and dispossession, while the occupier is 
shielded and empowered instead of protection for the people languishing occupation . 
Their right to self -determination, freedom, dignity, independence, and sovereignty over the 
land of the State of Palestine occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, continues to 
be denied.  
More than a thousand UN resolutions remain unimplemented. Numerous initiatives and 
efforts have failed to bring an end to this tragic situation being endured by the Palestinian 
people under  occupation.  
In 1993, we signed a peace agreement. We fulfilled all our obligations: we recognized the 
State of Israel, Israel recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO) as the sole 
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, we restructured our institutions, 
amended our National Charter, renounced violence and terrorism, adopted the culture of 
peace, and worked tirelessly to build modern Palestinian state instit utions to live side by 
side in peace and security with Israel. Yet Israel failed to hono r its commitments and 
deliberately undermined the signed agreements.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Just three days ago, we gathered in the high-level International Conference in New York, co -
chaired by France and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, with broad international participation 
and unified positions reflecting a genuine global will to end this historic conflict through 
recognition of the State of Palestine, ending t he occupation, and restoring hope to both 
Palestinians and Israelis.  
Here, on behalf of the Palestinian people, I extend our deepest appreciation and gratitude 
to all the States that have recently recognized the State of Palestine and those preparing to 
do so soon. We call upon all States that have not yet recognized Palestine to do so, and we 
call for support for Palestine’s full UN membership. It must be recalled that we already 
recognized Israel’s right to exist in 1988 and again in 1993, and we continue to do so.  
In this regard, we thank France, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Belgium, Portugal, 
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, San Marino  and Andorra for their recognition. We also thank 
the 149 States that previously recognized Palestine. Our people will never forget this noble 
stance.  
We also highly commend the crucial leadership of the conference’s co -chairs, Saudi Arabia 
and France, as well as the United Kingdom, and thank all States that chaired working 
groups, participated, and continue to participate in the Global Alliance for the 
Implementation of the Two -State Solution . Our gratitude  also goes to all States supporting 
our efforts to stop genocide, end the occupation, and achieve peace.  
We deeply value the peoples and organizations worldwide that have demonstrated in 
solidarity with the Palestinian people’s right to freedom and independence and for an end 
to the war, destruction, and starvation. We reject any conflation between solidarity with 
Palestine and antisemitism, which we categorically reject, based on our values and 
principles.  
In light of the International Peace Conference’s outcomes, we reiterate our call  today 
before the General Assembly for the following:  
1. The immediate and permanent cessation of the war in Gaza.  
2. The unconditional delivery of humanitarian aid through UN agencies, including 
UNRWA, and an end to the use of starvation as a weapon  of war. We thank all sister and 
friendly states and organizations sending aid  to our people . 
3. The release of all hostages and prisoners on both sides.  
4. The full withdrawal of Israeli occupation forces from Gaza, rejection of 
displacement schemes, cessation of settlement activity and settler terrorism, halting the 
theft of Palestinian land and property under annexation schemes , and stopping violations 
of the historical and legal status of holy sites —all unilateral actions that undermine the 
two-State solution in Gaza, the West Bank , including in Jerusalem.  
5. The State of Palestine assuming full responsibilities, beginning with the Gaza  
Administrat ion Committee, chaired by a minister in the Palestinian government, to manage 
Gaza temporarily and link it to the West Bank, with Arab and international support to 
protect civilians in Gaza, and support for Palestinian security forces under UN auspices —
not as a substitute to them . 
6. Guaranteeing that our people in Gaza  remain in their land without displacement, 
and implementing the recovery and reconstruction plan in both Gaza and the West Bank.  
7. The release of Palestinian tax revenues illegally withheld by Israel, lifting of barriers, 
and ending the economic siege imposed on Palestinian towns, villages, and refugee 
camps.  
8. Support for our national reform efforts, and holding presidential and parliamentary 
elections within one year after the war’s end. Practical steps have begun, including the 
formation of a temporary constitutional drafting committee to complete its work wi thin 
three months, transitioning from authority to State. We want a modern democratic State 
committed to international law, rule of law, pluralism, peaceful transfer of power, and 
empowering women and youth. We will develop the educational curricula in a ccordance 
with UNESCO standards within two years, and we have established a unified social welfare 
system, abolishing the previous system of payments to the families of prisoners and 
martyrs, which is now ready for auditing.  
9. We declare our readiness to work with President Donald Trump, with Saudi Arabia, 
France, the United Nations, and all partners to implement the peace plan adopted at the 
September 22 conference, paving the way to a just peace and comprehensive regional 
cooperation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
We say it clearly today: there will be no peace without justice, and no justice without 
Palestine’s liberation.  
We want to live in freedom, security, and peace like all other peoples of the earth —in an 
independent, sovereign state on the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, living 
in peace with our neighbors. We want a modern, civil state, free of violen ce, weapons, and 
extremism, respectful of law and human rights, investing in people, development, 
technology, and education —not in wars and conflicts.  
The time has come for the international community to grant justice to the Palestinian 
people, so they may achieve their legitimate rights and break free from occupation. Our 
people must no longer remain captive to the whims of Israeli politics that continue to deny 
our basic rights and perpetuate oppression, injustice, and aggression.  
We will continue along our path, pursuing peaceful, legal, and diplomatic struggle until we 
secure our rights.  
Finally, we say to our sons and daughters in the homeland , our refugees, and in the 
diaspora : however deep our wounds, however long our suffering, they will not break our will 
to live and remain. The dawn of freedom will rise, and the flag of Palestine will fly high in our 
skies, symbolizing dignity, resilience, and liberation from occupation.  
Palestine is ours, and Jerusalem is the jewel of our hearts and our eternal capital. We will 
not abandon our homeland, we will not leave our land. Our people will remain rooted like 
the olive tree, firm as rock, rising from beneath the rubble to rebuild anew, sending from 
their blessed land messages of hope, the voice of truth, and bridges of just peace to the 
peoples of our region and the world at large.  
Peace, mercy, and blessings of God be upon you.  
 