1 
  
 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY!  
 
 
Statement by the President of the Republic of Slovenia 
H.E. Nataša Pirc Musar at the  
 
General Debate of the 80th Session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations : 
 
"Better together: 80 years and more for peace, 
development and human rights"  
 
Tuesday, 23rd September 2025  
New York  
 
 
 
 

2 
 Madam President , please accept my warmest congratulations 
on your election at this historic, 80th anniversary of the United 
Nations. Your election underscores the vital importance of 
including women in decision -making processes.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Excellencies:  
 
In 1945, the end of the Second World War was greeted with 
celebration, and hopes were placed in a new era of peace and 
co-operation, embodied by the creation of the United Nations. 
However, those hopes were soon overshadowed by the onset of 
the Cold War. When it ended in 1991, we once again dared to 
believe that this would pave the way  to the vision of lasting 
peace, security and co -operation as enshrined in the UN 
Charter. Sadly, that vision has not materialised. In fact, the 
situation has worsened. Here is why . 
 
Firstly,  the Security Council, envisioned as the very pillar of 
collective security, is failing to meet the expectations of the world 
– if it ever has. The Permanent Five were supposed to be role 
models for the rest of the world, working for peace. Some  work 
in their own interests instead.  
Secondly , the promise of the Sustainable Development Goals is 
faltering. Progress is lagging, and with cuts in development 
3 
 assistance, millions of the world’s poorest are pushed further 
away from access to even the most basic services.  
 
Thirdly,  international law appears to stand at the precipice of 
irrelevance. The independence of elected international judges, 
the integrity of human rights institutions, personal security of 
human rights defenders, and the authority of this Organisation 
are under  siege.  
 
Fourthly , the Genocide Convention risks becoming a relic of the 
past. Some states have put the International Criminal Court to its 
greatest challenge ever. Its prosecutors, whose only duty is the 
pursuit of justice, and its judges, whose responsibility is to uphol d 
the law, our international law, now face sanctions and 
intimidation. As if the states that sanction them would prefer to 
shield the alleged perpetrators of atrocities, rather than confront 
the truth and help deliver justice.  
 
Fifthly,  the landmark opinion of the International Court of 
Justice, affirming that international law obliges states to prevent 
harming the climate, already feels obsolete.  
 
4 
 And finally , states are withdrawing from the Paris Climate 
Agreement, from the Ottawa Treaty, and from UN agencies, or 
simply cutting their financing. Each such act chips away at the 
support for multilateralism, a system designed not for the 
powerful few, but for the  benefit of us all.   
 
Madam President,  how are we to explain these trends to our 
electorates, to our people, and, above all, to our children?  
Shall we tell them that this is the new normal? That might makes 
right? That the strong may seize what they want – because they 
can? That they may kill with impunity – because they can? That 
they may pollute, wage wars, and trample on international law – 
just because they can?  
 
Are we prepared to look our children in the eyes and say: “This 
is the world you’ll inherit, and there’s nothing we can do about 
it”? 
 
With the adoption of the Pact for the Future last year, we have 
charted a path toward a stronger, more forward -looking United 
Nations. But we must now create the conditions to fulfil our 
commitments. One way forward is to establish a permanent 
advocacy net work to give the Pact unconditional, sustained 
political support. To this end, I propose the creation of a Global 
5 
 Forum for the Future : an inclusive movement of states 
committed to multilateralism, mutual respect and the defence of 
our shared vision. A movement determined to stand up for the 
Pact and drive its implementation at every level.   
 
As states consider how to implement the Pact for the Future, 
some solutions may be seen as inconvenient today. But in the 
long run, they are not optional. They are systemically necessary.  
  
The first example is the reform of the Security Council. We all 
recognise that it is the principal organ entrusted with the 
maintenance of international peace and security. But what it is 
not – and must never be – is a body that stands above 
international law to defend the interes ts of some at the expense 
of others.   
 
Jus cogens  norms must be safeguarded as a matter of principle. 
If the prohibitions against genocide and crimes against humanity 
are accepted as jus cogens norms, can any permanent member 
claim a legitimate veto right in such circumstances? Member 
States have attempted to address this question through many 
reform proposals, with minimal progress. That is why we must 
dare to go further – now. We, the General Assembly, must take 
6 
 a bold step and request an advisory opinion from the 
International Court of Justice on this very question .  
 
 
Second, we must confront the gap between our words and 
actions on gender equity. Progress has been made, but far too 
modestly. Over the past 80 years, only 13% of leaders in 
multilateral organisations have been women! And no woman has 
ever served as Secretary -General of the United Nations. This 
must change.  
 
So, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen – let us make history!  
Today, the 80th Session of the General Assembly is led by only 
the fifth woman to hold the presidency. By the end of this 
session, she should be joined by a Madam Secretary -General -
elect. A living proof to four billion women that even the “most 
impossible job” is not bey ond their reach.  
 
But gender representation is not enough. What we must achieve 
is actual gender equity, because it benefits not only women and 
girls, but entire societies. True equity requires systemic change, 
and so women’s empowerment must remain at the heart of our 
global agenda. International organisations must weave a gender 
perspective into every strand of policy -making. And that should 
7 
 be a result of effective participation of women and girls 
themselves. Electing a Madam Secretary -General would be 
historic, but it must only be the beginning of a much deeper 
transformation.  
Madam President , the Pact for the Future sets out clearly what 
must be done to change our world for the better. I have 
mentioned only two of the many challenges we must confront 
decisively. But we can only succeed as a community if we accept 
that there is no future for h umanity without a fundamental 
change.  
 
The mandate of the Global Forum for the Future would be to 
push towards such a change. This is why it must be inclusive. It 
must not be merely a coalition of countries. It must inspire 
hundreds of millions  of people. For when it comes to human 
dignity, the constituency of like -minded individuals is vast, 
diverse and knows no borders. Human dignity is indivisible. We 
must fight for it, no matter how great the obstacles. And there are 
many.   
 
Think of hunger. Time and again, humanity rose across 
continents to confront the scourge of hunger. To no avail. Worse 
still, hunger is now being weaponised – turned into a tool of war! 
We receive reports on a daily basis of how women and children 
8 
 are starved because they are marked as legitimate targets, as 
enemies. How cruel, how inhumane, is that, ladies and 
gentlemen?  
 
We cannot allow this to happen any longer. Forty years ago, 
musicians stood against hunger. Instead of guns, they – the 
Band Aid – used music. The world heard them, but they were not 
loud enough, as hunger has not been eradicated. Today, we 
have science. W e can address, on a scale, beyond imagination, 
not only hunger, but every act of violence against human beings, 
and all human fears.   
 
Granted, science, technology and global connectivity are too 
often twisted by cynical leaders and war -mongering regimes. But 
they can also be harnessed for the common good! Artists, 
influencers and visionaries with audiences of millions can join 
forces wit h the governments of like -minded nations. Together, 
their voice in defence of humanity could become irresistible. 
Together, they – we – can demand real action by all 
governments, all world and community leaders, on the Pact for 
the Future and hold to accou nt those who betray human dignity 
to its very core: through wars of aggression, genocidal policies 
and crimes against humanity. If we join forces and make 
ourselves heard, nobody can ignore us, not even the most 
arrogant governments and individual politici ans.  
9 
  
Of course, such initiatives cannot emerge out of thin air. They 
require leadership  – strong, inclusive and fearless leadership! 
We, the leaders of today, are only transient custodians of power. 
Some of us may not be here after the next election. But that is 
precisely why we must act now. Our responsibility and destiny 
will be judged by how we treat our planet and its people today. 
We simply cannot afford silence, ignorance, or passivity – not 
while we hold power and possess the power of the word.  
 
Hesitation is not an option, Madam President. For most of us, 
members of the UN, it is not might that makes right – it is the 
opposite. We must not allow the powerful few to ignore us. We 
must not surrender to a world where power alone prevails. We, 
the majority of UN members, must be role models. We must work 
for a different world.  
 
The Global Forum for the Future can be a platform for the much -
needed transformation in which partnerships with non -state 
actors and companies are indispensable. Profits must finally 
serve development for all . Innovation and sustainability must 
drive tolerance, mutual respect and inclusive dialogue.   
 
10 
 Is that too much to ask? If we, the leaders of this planet, can offer 
nothing but terror, conflict, pollution, fear, inequalities and war to 
eight billion people, then we must confront the truth: we are 
complicit in crimes against our civilisation and our planet. And 
not just us, heads of states, but leaders of international 
institutions, CEOs, and every individual  with the power to make 
a difference, share this responsibility. None of us can claim 
ignorance of what is at stake.  
 
If we believe in human dignity for all, we must  deliver more: a 
world that fulfils lives, not threatens them. We must say YES to 
inclusive multilateralism, and a resounding NO to multipolarism. 
Let us show that this General Assembly can and will make a 
difference, as it has often done before. Let us de monstrate that 
we reject arrogance, hatred and wilful blindness to a lack of 
equality and justice, to wars of aggression, crimes against 
humanity, and genocide – because they tear us apart, for 
generations. And let us proclaim, in all seriousness and since rity, 
that we embrace personal and collective responsibility to uphold 
humanity, sustainable development, and international law – 
because this will keep us together as a civilisation. For 
generations.  Thank you . 