 
   
 
 
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA  
OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY H.E. DR. PHILIP ISDOR MPANGO, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE 
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH 
SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW YORK,  
25 SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
 
1 
 • H.E. Annalena Baerbock, P resident  of the 80th Session of the UN G A; 
• H.E. António Guterres,  Secretary -General of the United Nations;  
• Excellencies Heads of State and Government ; 
• Distinguished Delegate s. 
 
1. Courtesy  
I wish to start by conveying , to this august assembly , fraternal  greetings from H .E. Dr. 
Samia Suluhu Hassan, President of the United Republic of Tanzania, and the people of my 
country. I also extend sincere congratulations to you, Madam  President, on your election to 
preside over the 80th session of the UNGA .  Tanzania pledges its support to your leadership.  
We equally  commend your predecessor for his service, as well as  the Secretary -General and 
the entire Secretariat , for the ir dedicated  work for humanity as guardians  of the UN Charter,  
despite unprecedented financial challenges.  
 
2. Theme of UNGA  80 
Madam President,  Excellencies & Distinguished Delegates : This year, we gather at 
a historic moment , when we are commemorating 80 years since the founding of the U N, 
but in a sombre mood!  The theme of this General Debate,  that is , “Better Together: 80 
Years and More for Peace, Development and Human Rights” , reminds us that determined 
cooperation , remains our best vehicle for  addressing urgent  global challenges of this century 
and beyond . Yet, we are faced with chaos , in the form of unilateralism with arrogance, 
barbaric  wars, persistent poverty, injustice, pandemics , as well as an impending climate 
catastrophe .  
 
As we mark 80 years of the U N, we are called to rekindle  the vision of its founders , anchored  
on two pillars . First, nations can overcome difficulties and accomplish more , when they work 
together in solidarity. Second , peace is humanity’s truest desire , which we must seek and 
pursue relentlessly , on the basis of international law . By contrast, war is undesirable. It is a 
senseless path to  resolving conflicts  on which every body loses, and its bitter fruits include:  
unspeakable loss of innocent lives, too many orphans, widows , and refugees , as well as 
wanton destruction . Yet, t he UN Charter has guided us through many challenges  over the 
past 80 years,  reminding us to uphold peace, justice, cooperation , and dialogue  to resolve 
conflicts . Today, as the world faces new tests, we must therefore hold firmly to these same 
principles, for it is only by respecting and living by the Charter that we can honor the past 
and build a safer and better future for all  of us.  
3. Reform of the United Nations  and IFIs  
Excellencies : The past eight decades also remind us that , change is the only constant in 
our world. The challenges of today are not the same as those of yesterday, nor will they be 
the same tomorrow. Thus, f or the U N to remain relevant and true  to its noble mission, it 
must embrace change. Tanzania welcomes the UN 80 reform initiative, unveiled in March 
this year, which seeks  to enhance efficiency across the UN system and strengthening 
effectiveness. My country stresses the importance of upholding the principles of 
transparency, equity , and objectivity in the pro cess, so as to renew trust and foster inclusive 
global governance. We thank the Secretary  General for engaging Member States in this 
endeavor . Nevertheless , Tanzania  reiterates Africa’s position on redressing the continent's 
2 
 underrepresentation in the Security Council , and calls for admission of at least two 
permanent seats for Africa , with veto power , as articulated by the Ezulwini consensus .  
 
Tanzania also joins other countries  of the Global South , in demanding  urgent and 
comprehensive reform of the global financial system . While w e support the outcomes of the 
Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development held in Seville , Spain this 
year, we renew  the call for scaling -up long -term concessional financing, revising sovereign 
credit rating frameworks , and rethinking debt sustainability assessments , in order to unlock 
capital for investment in infrastructure, education, health, and climate adaptation. We 
reiterate our demand for  increased voice and rep resentation of Africa in the governance 
structures of the IMF  and the World Bank . These noble demands have gone unheeded for 
a very long time and must be addressed  now.   
 
4. Agenda 2030 and Climate Action  
Excellencies : SDGs remain our common plan for a better world. Yet, with only five years 
left before 2030, it has been established that over 80 % of the targets are off track, with 
progress on more than half of the Goals being weak and insufficient . The big elephant in 
the room suffocating progress, is an estimated financing gap of $4 trillion  p.a. Nevertheless, 
Tanzania remains committed and has made strides  in implementation of the 2030 Agenda , 
with overall performance estimated at 60% . Examples  include: SDG 3 , where maternal 
mortality declined from 750 deaths per 1000 live births (2000) to 104 (2022). For SDG 6 , 
access to clean and safe water increased in both rural and urban areas from 32% & 55% 
(2000) to 79.9% & 94% respectively , by 2024 . On a ffordable clean energy  (SDG 7 ), the 
number of villages connected to  electricity increased from 8,587 (2000) to 12,318 (2024) . 
Only 15 villages remain without electricity . However,  significant challenges remain, 
especially on environmental sustainability (SDGs 13, 14, & 15) .   
 
Going forward, we urge the international community to strengthen collective response to 
climate change,  seizing the opportunity presented by COP 30 in Belem, Brazil , prioritizing 
delivery  on the pledges for climate action , including capitalization of the Loss and Damage 
Fund. We call for increased long -term concessional financing, technology transfer, and fairer 
trade terms, to complement our zeal in domestic revenue mobilization, reversing capital 
flight and pursuit of win -win partnerships in the exploitation of our natural re sources. I am 
glad to inform the Assembly  that in June 2025, we launched the Tanzania Vision 2050, that 
articulates our long-term development aspirations and dovetails  quite well  with the SDGs  
agenda .  
 
5. Global Peace and Security  
Excellencies : Peace is not a bonus , it is a prerequisite for socio -economic development . 
We must therefore seek and pursue peace tirelessly . We commend the efforts of the UN 
Secretary General, world leaders, and organisations  that are active in  conflict mediation  and 
resolution in countries and  regions such as Eastern DRC, Sudan, Russia , Ukraine, and the 
Middle East . As we commemorate  the Beijing +30 and celebrate the progress made in 
promoting gender equality and the empower ment of  women , we call for full involvement of 
women in  the quest for peace. In this regard, I must say H.E. Dr. Samia Suluhu Hassan, the 
first woman President of Tanzania , has shown the way  in articulating policies and actions 
that strengthen the role of women across all sectors of our society . Regionally and  
3 
 internationally , she has been a champion of peace, justice, security , and clean cooking . 
Tanzania as a member of the African Union Peace and Security Council and in our then role 
as Chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defense  and Security Cooperation over the past 
year, actively contributed to peace initiatives and supported measures to prevent and 
resolve conflicts. In this spirit, Tanzania announces its candidacy for a non -permanent seat 
on the U N Security Council for the term 2029 -2030, reaffirming our commitment to global 
peace and security.   
 
6. Sanctions , Embargoes , Forced Occupation and Terrorism  
Excellencies : Tanzania opposes  the continued imposition and proliferation of unilateral 
coercive measures, which undermine the principles of sovereign equality, and peaceful 
coexistence , enshrined in the UN Charter. Such measures, often applied without the 
mandate of the Security Council, represent a form of economic aggression that 
disproportionately harms innocent civilians , by depriving them of essential needs , such as 
food, medicines, and capital goods . In this context, Tanzania reiterates its principled 
solidarity with nations, inc luding Zimbabwe and Cuba and  people s who continue to endure 
the adverse effects of the long -standing economic embargo and sanctions. We stress that 
these embargoes and sanctions  contravene international law . Similarly, Tanzania stands in 
solidarity with the people  of Palestine  and Sahrawi who continue to be  denied the 
fundamental rights of freedom , sovereignty , and self-determination . Tanzania also strongly 
condemns all forms of terrorism, carried out within or across national borders.  
 
7. Conclusion  
Madam President,  Excellencies & Distinguished Delegates : In his last speech to the 
UNGA prior to retirement  in 1985 , Mwalimu Julius Nyerere , the founding President of my 
country, articulated the principle  that, and I quote : “To be  silent when we see danger , to 
refrain from attacking policies which we see as contrary to the interest of peace and justice , 
to do these things , would be to surrender our freedom and our dignity . That, we shall never 
do”, end of quote. Following the same principle, Tanzania considers unilateralism and 
misuse of military might , as well as  shameful incapacity of the international community and 
global powers , to bring an end to bloodshed and horrific wars, raging in many places around 
the world , to be unacceptable . Similarly, Tanzania condemns the resurg ing use of the law 
of the jungle as a means of resolving conflicts, as well as  committing atrocities that cast 
shame on the whole of humanity, particularly extreme violence against children, women, 
the sick and the elderly in conflict situations , as well as  imperial attitudes , including  that of  
regarding Africa as a free mine to be exploited and ample land to be plundered ! The 
hypocrisy and scandal of international companies (some of which are state -sponsored) to 
continue to prosper from the exploitation of Africa’s natural wealth , while causing or 
supporting conflicts ! should be brought to an end  now. Instead, Africa needs win -win 
partnerships in the exploitation of our natural  wealth. Tanzania also reminds the 
international community that increased military spending  on research and manufacture of 
weapons for money , is tragic  and morally wrong . It obstructs the quest for  peace in the 
world , and takes away an enormous amount of resources that could have been used to 
propel  sustainable development  and prosperity for all humanity . 
 
Thank you ! 