ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF 
UZBEKISTAN SHAVKAT MIRZIYOYEV AT THE 80TH SESSION OF 
THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
 
Distinguished Mr. Chairman!  
Distinguished Secretary -General!  
Heads of delegations!  
Ladies and gentlemen!  
I’m truly delighted  to extend my congratulation s to you with the 80th 
anniversary Session of the United Nations General Assembly.  
Our meeting today is taking place in a complex, rap idly changing global 
situation that calls for new approaches to the work of our Organization and its 
future.  
Today, across the world, t he role and place of international institutions  are 
weakening, confrontations, conflicts , and wars are intensifying, technological 
and social inequality is increasing, and economic and humanitarian crises  are 
deepening.  
All of this is creating a n entirely new  and unsettling geopolitical reality.  
We highly commend  the efforts of His Excellency Secretary -General 
António Guterres aimed at maintain ing our Organization as the main platform 
for the peacef ul resolution of the most difficult and pressing  global issues.  
In this regard, we fully support the UN80 Initiative and reaffirm our strong  
commitment to the Pact for the Future.  
We support the transformation  of the United Nations Security Council and 
the expansion of its membership in order to effectively address current  threats 
and challenges, and protect the interests of the developing countries.  
Distinguished participants of the session ! 
We are pursuing  a policy to build a democratic, rule-based , social, and 
secular New Uzbekistan  in full alignment with the Sustainable Development 
Goals.   
To this end, we are consistently continuing our irreversible reforms.  
2 
Our top -priority goal is to fundamentally transform the lives of each and 
every family and  citizen in our country, to enhanc e human dignity and well -
being.  
In recent years, we have managed to reduce the pov erty rate in Uzbekistan 
from 35 percent to 6.6 percent.  
We have achieved  this result primarily through the transformation of the 
education and science sector;  
establishment  of innovative industries and high-tech manufacturing 
enterprises ;  
modernization of green  energ y and transport infrastructure;  
comprehensive development of small businesses, and, as a result, the 
creation of millions of jobs.   
In our country, preschool education coverage has increased from 27 to 78 
percent, while  the higher education uptake among our youth has risen from 9 to 
42 percent.  
Most importantly, we consider enhanc ing the status and prestige of the 
teaching profession  as a key issue .  
In order  to create a single international platform for the exchange of 
teachers’  experience and knowledge , we propose to hold a World Summit on 
Professional Education  in Uzbekistan . 
We are also creating an advanced healthcare system in our country.  
We invite all our foreign partners to participate in a high -level event 
dedicated to the fight against childhood cancer and other serious diseases, which 
will be held  tomorrow at our initia tive at the United Nations headquarters.  
Another important area is gender policy.  
We aim to further strengthen the role of women in the soci al, political , and 
business life of our country.  
We advocate for holding the Asian Women’s Forum regularly in our region, 
turning it into a permanent platform.  
I would like to emphasize once again: we remain committed to our 
obligations in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.  
By 2030, we intend to join the ranks of “u pper-middle -income” countr ies. 
To this end, we  will consistently continue our open  and pragmatic policy . 
3 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
Eight  years ago, from this esteemed podium , we declared our firm 
determination to transform Central Asia into a region of peace, good 
neighborliness, and partnership.  
Today , we can  confidently declare that we have achieved this strategic goal.  
The era of closed borders, unresolved disputes , and conflicts is in the past. 
In recent years, the volume of mutual trade, investments , and transport ation 
of goods  in our region has increased fivefold . We are implementing joint 
investment funds, cross -border trade and industrial cooperation zones, and major 
infrastructure projects.  
We also recognize as a common achievement tha t the Consultative 
Meetings of the Heads of State of Central Asia have become an effective 
mechanism for deepening regional integration.  
I can confidently affirm that  as of now, we are at the beginning stage of 
forming a New Central Asia.  
Our region, thanks to its unity, stability, and distinct identity, is steadily 
securing a stronger position in the system of international relat ions as an 
independent actor.  
In order to  achieve our goals, we intend to give top priority to expandin g 
mutually beneficial ties with all our foreign partners.  
In this regard, t ogether with the U N structures, we propose to implement a 
number of new projects and programs in ou r region . 
In particular, we propose:  
- holding an international forum under the auspices of ECOSOC and 
UNCTAD dedicated to the  economic development of the Central Asian states;  
- establish ing a regional hub  for green technologies in industry  jointly with 
UNIDO ; 
- adopt ing programs on the rational use of water resources , the creation of 
“green” space s, and the achievement of demographic resilience in our region ; 
In addition, we propose the adoption of a U N General Assembly resolution 
support ing the efforts of the Central Asian countries aimed at deepening regional 
partnership and economic integration.  
 
4 
Distinguished heads of delegations!  
Speaking about global and regional security and sustainable development, 
it is impossible to overlook the iss ue of Afghanistan.  
Supporting the aspirations of the Afghan people for a peaceful and stable 
life requires the united efforts of the international community . 
I would like to emphasize that it is of utmost  importance to prevent this 
country’s isolation.  
We are engaged in a constructive dialogue with the de facto authorities  of 
Afghanistan.  
We intend  to implement large -scale economic and infrastructure projects.  
We propose to adopt a dedicated UN resolution  on the development of 
transport and energy corridors of international significance through the territory 
of this country . 
At the same time, we cannot turn a blind eye to the deeply worsening 
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip. We call for an immediate cessation of 
hostilities and the continuation of political negotiations.  
In line with the UN resolutions, we rem ain steadfast supporters of the  “two 
state solution” principle.  
We are also deeply concerned by the situation around  Ukraine.  We 
welcome the start of high-level dialogue aimed at resolving this crisis through 
diplomatic means.  
 
Distinguished participants of the event ! 
Effective measures are being undertaken to implement the Global Counter -
Terrorism Strategy  in Central Asia . 
In cooperation with the U N Office of Counter -Terrorism, a Regional 
Council on Rehabilitation and Reintegration  was established . We propose to 
transform  this Council into an International Competence Center.  
This body serves as an important  platform for exchanging experiences on 
adapting to peaceful life  for those repatriated from conflict zones.  
Furthermore, we stand ready to provide all the necessary conditions for the 
establishm ent of a regional Office of Counter -Terrorism in Uzbekistan.  
 
5 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
In today’s world, full of threats, we are witnessing  how vulnerable  the 
global transport system  is. These challenges  primarily have a negative impact on 
the stability of landlocked dev eloping countries.  
It is of utmost importance to ensure the security of international transit 
corridors and to establish efficient logistics networks .  
In this regard, we believe the time has come to introduce a global 
mechanism on “Strengthening transport connectivi ty to ac hieve Sustainable 
Development Goals”.  
I would also like to draw special attention to the increasingly acute 
challenges of climate change.  
For instance, t he consequences of t he Aral Sea  desiccation must remain at 
the constant focus of the international community.  
We are consistently continuing our work to r estore the Aral Sea ecosystem.  
In recent years, s alt-tolerant desert plants have been planted on 2 million 
hectares of the dried seabed of the Sea.  
By 2030, green cover will be created on 80 percent of this area.  
Another serious issue  is the water scarcity. At present , more than two billion 
people in the world do not have access to clean drinking water.  
We are planning to hold a World Forum on Water Saving in our country.   
The outcomes of this confere nce are expected to recognize  the water crisis 
as a serious threat to sustainable development.  We intend to adopt a special Road 
Map for the wide introduction of innovation technologies globally . 
Another adverse consequence of climate change is  the intensifying trend  of 
climate migration . 
Unfortunately, clear international mechanisms and a legal framework in 
this direction have not yet been created.  
We advocate  for the adoption of a Global Pact for a broad international 
partnership and coordinated policy on this  serious  issue.  
 
Dear participants of the meeting!  
It is of great importance to prevent inequalities in digital development and 
the use of artificial intelligence between countries.  
6 
We propose to create an International Cooperation Mechanism  aimed at the 
gratis exchange of practical solutions and models of artificial intelligence in 
healthcare, education , and culture . 
I would like to emphasize another priority issue.  Our future , the destiny , 
and the prosperity of the world are in the hands of the younger generation.  
It is our urgent task to instill in the hearts and minds of our sons and 
daughters the most noble ideas , such as peace, humanism and friend ship, mutual 
trust, and respect . 
Therefore, we put forward  the proposal to establish the “World Youth 
Movement for Peace ” and to locate its headquarters in Uzbekistan.  
We are consistently implementing a policy of tolerance in our society. At 
the same time, we will actively continue our efforts to deeply study the  ideas of 
Islamic enlightenment and promote them to the world.  
In the coming months, we will open the Center of Islamic Civilization, 
which is unique for our wider region . 
We intend to hold a special presentation at the United Nations of the rich 
spiritua l and scientific heritage of our great ancestors – thinkers and scholars such 
as Imam Bukhari, Imam Termizi , and Imam Maturidi.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen!   
The N ew Uzbekistan is a supporter of mutual solidarity , open dialogue , and 
close  partnership with all countries.  
We are always  ready to contribute to strengthening dialogue among 
peoples, cultures, and civilizations, and to achieving  universal human goals.  
Thank you for your attention.  