0 | P a g e  
  
 
 
 
 
Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
to the United Nations  
685 3rd Ave., Suite 1108, New York, NY 10017 • Tel: (212) 599 -0950 • Fax: (212) 599 -1020 •  
svgmission@gmail.com  | http://svg -un.org   
 
 
 
 
Statement  
 
by 
H.E. Hon. Dr. Ralph E. Gonsalves  
Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
 
 
 
General Debate of the United Nations General Assembly 80th Session  
 
 
 
September 26th, 2025 
New York  
 
 
 
Check against delivery  

1 | P a g e  
 STATEMENT BY DR. THE HON. RALPH E. GONSALVES,  
PRIME MINISTER OF ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES  
TO THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY 80TH SESSION  
 
 
Your Excellency, the esteemed President of the United Nations  
General Assembly; Your Excellencies:  
 
The condition of today’s world is more complicated, more dangerous 
than ever, more uneven in its human development, more integrated, 
yet more disparate and desperate.  At the same time, much progress  
and advancements have been made by humanity; and there is an 
enduring hopefulness amidst despair ; a persistent sense in much of 
humanity that a better tomorrow is possible, even as catastrophes 
loom and dangers lurk . 
 
[So, we have been witnessing an exacerbation of conflicts and wars 
between some nations, and at the same time, abiding quests for 
comity and peace by others; we have been observing a wanton 
disregard of international law by powerful states yet a yearning from 
others for the upholding of a n international legal order grounded in 
2 | P a g e  
 long-established precepts; and international trade  has become 
disruptive and chaotic through unilateral actions on tariffs, the 
weaponi sing of currency and the payments  systems  by the powerful , 
contrary  to all basic international norms, amidst resistance by those 
who rely  on multilateral agreements. ] 
 
[At the core of the destabilising  actions of imperial powers and rising  
hegemons have been an absolutely i nsane ambition  for unilateral  
dominance , globally and regionally, and an abandonment of a 
necessary and desirable  multilateralism as envisaged by the Charter 
of the United Nations and other global compacts o n this or that 
pressing or existential issue. ] 
 
Your Excellencies, , big -power rivalries, interlaced with personal  
vainglories and hubris, are gravely unsettling the world to the 
advantage of not one single nation -state. Civilized discourse, 
tempered with a patience and a calm, has given way to a bellicosity 
of language shouted across continents and oceans designed, 
presumably, to satisfy nativist longings in the b reasts of those  who 
those who think that, despite their good fortune , relatively, they have 
3 | P a g e  
 been grievously wronged by some dark and hidden forces. Can none 
of the se persons  pause and reflect upon  the question posed and 
answered by all the world’s great religions , but in particular, through 
the words of the Hebrew Prophet Micah: “What does the Lord require 
of us?  To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with o ur God.”  
 
[Historically, and manifestly  so today,  powerful  nations make at least 
four major, but avoidable, errors: First, they downplay or ignore, at 
their own peril , the material and other interests of less powerful 
nations; secondly, they arrogantly believe that they are better than 
everyone else, and are blind to the uplifting histories of those they 
consider their inferiors; thirdly , powerful nati ons in an asymmetrical 
relationship  with others tend to believe, mistakenly, that  their 
dominance  is permanent and just, th at resistance by others is futile , 
doomed to failure; and fourthly , in th e reassertion of unilateral 
dominance, great powers invariably hanker for an illusory past that 
never was; such posturing inevitably leads to frustration, 
disillusionment, open conflict , further militari sation, and war.  A 
nation cannot look forward to a glorious , unblemished past that 
never was , and succeed; this pristine “fatherland” or “motherland”  
4 | P a g e  
 fantasy to which modern -day imperial giants  and rising hegemons of 
the west or east seek to return, in glory, is a pathway to damnation 
for the great power itself and for humanity as a whole.  History ought 
to be a gui de to an uplifting future, not a mirror  for misplaced 
vainglory  of an imaginary, distorted past, in pursuit of ignoble goals 
today.  Proud man, and woman, imperial or hegemonic,  dressed in 
temporary authority, ought not to be found most assured of that 
which he or she is most ignorant. ] 
 
The intractable problems facing humanity cannot be solved by any 
one nation acting unilaterally .  A mature multilateralism is required 
to address satisfa ctorily rampaging climate change  in the age of the 
Anthropocene ; to resolve the threats posed by nuclear weapo ns and 
their further spread; to pursue peace ful coexistence rather than 
conflict, terrorism, and war; to reform the system of financing for 
development, inclusive of a just climate  financing; to tackle 
success fully the growing challenges of Artificial Intelligence;  to 
achieve the 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, be guided 
by the Global Digital Compact  and the Pact for the Future ; and to 
reshape global governance more inclusively . 
5 | P a g e  
  
[This bundle of global issues of the moment are of interest and 
concern to all of humanity, but especially so to those which are Small 
Island Developing States (SIDS) , including my own country, St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines .  Each of these momentous  issues has 
solutions  to save Planet Earth and advance a much  better  life, living, 
and production for all; and these  solutions  have been  proffered  
repeatedly, but a handful of powerful  nations have opposed, declined 
or withdrawn from meaningful engagement  thereon, multilaterally or 
at all. ] 
 
[For example, the lucid proposals for a j oint climate financing , and 
more broadly , financing for development advanced  in the Bridgetown 
Initiative  3.0 by Prime Minister Mia Mottley of Barbados as endorsed 
by the Caribbean Community (C ARICOM) , have received a 
genuflection from the global power -houses, not  an embrace, in a 
cynical maneuver by them to  whittle down into near -nothingness the 
ambitious and progressive content. Similarly, President Irfaan Ali of 
Guyana  has put forward a credible and implemen table bundle of 
policies and programmes to fortify  Mother Earth’s biodiversity; 
6 | P a g e  
 conjoin the m with the 2024 Antigua and Barbuda A genda for SIDS , 
and the world would be a far better place. ] 
 
[Reasons of no serious merit have been offered for non -engagement , 
or downright opposition by certain majo r, and emerging powers on 
these critical matters for humanity’s survival and advancement.    
Indeed, one or two rich and powerful  countries have absurdly  trotted 
out a proposition of untruth that they are the ones who have been 
disadvantaged and thus must use their commanding wealth and 
power, unilaterally, to become  further advantaged.  Such absurdities 
are contributing immensely to the global condition of descending, 
metaphorically, to hell in a hand basket. A more unequal, oppressive , 
resentful, and Manichean world is the emergin g result. ] 
 
It is thus of the highest importance for this august body, the United 
Nations, and the overwhelming  majority of nation -states within it, to 
continue our efforts  to persuade the powerful to act equitably, 
honourably, and multilaterally to tackle efficaciously  the extant and 
looming challenges facing the global community. Oft -times, it is 
frustrating an d disheartening  to those of us who are committed to 
7 | P a g e  
 this necessary and desirable path  of mature multilateralism because 
our herculean efforts  seemingly  delive r, correspondingly , negligible 
results. Nevertheless, we cannot give up; we cannot afford to get 
weary; we have no choice  but to persist in this ever -more urgent 
multilateral solidarity and cooperation  as we pursue the political and 
economic spaces to make this world a better place for all humanity.  
[In the process, we ourselves must resist creatively; devise our 
strategies and tactical approaches with understanding, wisdom, and 
acute judgement ; act sensibly and maturely; be principled and 
unyielding yet not averse to compromises as the circumstances admit 
or demand; proceed with urgency where nece ssary and desirable but 
know, too, that the tyranny of now can often be unproductive. ] 
 
Your Excellencies, St. Vincent and the Grenadines , like all countries 
globally , have been shaped by our history and geography , our nature 
and neighbours, our extant circumstances and our dreams for a 
better future.  For example, we carry the benefits and the burdens of 
our geographic location, near to the greatest economic, military, 
scientific, and culturally -dominant  power the world has even seen .  
St. Vincent and the Grenadines is where it is; it cannot be lifted up 
8 | P a g e  
 and taken  to Vladivostok or the mouth of the Amur River .  Yet, as a 
free and independent people, we have the right to pursue peacefully 
and securely our quest for shared prosperity without domination,  
interference or intervention from any of our neighbours or from any 
power that comes from afar . [Among other things, we have the right 
to choose our friends so long in doing so, we do not engage in any 
action , singly or jointly with others, to the detriment  or subversion  of 
the peace, security, and well -being of any other state.  But  my 
country’s right in this regard is being disrespected, not by any of our 
neighbours, but by a rising, or risen, hegemon from elsewhere, far 
away from our hemisphere. ] 
 
[Historically, our Caribbean, including St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines, has had to endure European colonialism, native 
genocide, the enslavement of African bodies; we have had to come to 
terms with egregious post -colonial, imperial designs . We have 
resisted all of this and more; and we have made accommodations as 
we consider appropriate in all the circumstances. ] Today, as I speak, 
my government and my people have another challenge from the 
nefarious activities of the agents of a rising, or risen, hegemon from 
9 | P a g e  
 another hemisphere, and from some  greedy, unprincipled  non-state 
operators  in Europe, acting in concert , seeking to pollute , and 
interfere in , our democracy, o ur free and fair elections which are 
scheduled to be held later this year.  Their conduct is unacceptable 
and hugely injurious to our people.  [The rising or risen hegemon from 
the east which pretends to be the friend of disadvantaged countries  
is demonstrating to me that it possesses no moral or other superiority 
to old -fashioned imperialism; if it continues to permit its agents to 
interfere or meddle in our elections, it would suffer  serious  
reputational  damage in our Caribbean, in our Latin America, as a 
rogue no better than any of its ancient tribe s.  Amidst all that has 
befallen us from the contradictions and challenges of the global 
political  economy and climate change, we now  have to face this 
dastardly, and determined conspiracy, against our competitive 
democracy. It is my duty to so inform this United Nations General 
Assembly. ] 
 
Your Excellencies , the raging genocide and neo -colonial oppression 
being committed against the Palestinian people in Gaza and the West 
Bank  before our very eyes on global television are continuing affronts 
10 | P a g e  
 to the elemental human rights of the Palestinians , to civili sed 
conduct, and to international law.  How can one state, a member of 
this august body, act with such impunity against defenseless  men, 
women, children?   Surely, the hottest  part of hell is reserved  for th ese 
perpetrators of genocide and those who are complicit in it !  Over two 
hundred years ago, the British committed large -scale genocide 
against the indigenous people of my country, the Callinago and the 
Garifuna , and we are still enduring  the historical legacies of 
underdevelopment therefrom; similarly, the genocidal enslavement of 
African bodies in our Caribbean, in our hemisphere.  It will take 
centuries for the pain, suffering, and legacies of the current genocide 
of the Palestinians to be repaired.  We i n the Caribbean are today 
demanding , justly, reparations for native genocide and the 
enslavement of African bodies, which occurred centuries ago.  This 
tragedy , this madness, that has been unfolding, unabated, in 
Palestine must stop. [The authors  of this genocide are storing up 
insecurity and unspeakable problems for themselves in the future.  It 
is pleasing to note that even countries of the North Atlantic military 
alliance are recognising the independent state of Palestine.  We hail 
11 | P a g e  
 the distinguished President of Palestine and the indomitable spirit of 
his people!  
 
Isare l’s recent  illegal expansion of this war against the P alestinian 
nation into the State of Qatar is unacceptable. We stand in solidarity 
with Qatar.  [Similarly, too, the war in Ukraine must be brought to 
an end.  Surely, all reasonable persons must by now realise that 
victory on the battlefield  is highly unlikely for either side.  There has 
to be a negotiated settlement which is likely to sa tisfy no one , but is 
required to save  lives, limbs, and treasure; perhaps, a mutually -
agreed  condition of dissatisfaction is the basis for a peaceful 
resolution , however tenuous  that may prove .] 
 
Your Excellencies, St. Vincent and the Grenadines calls urgently for 
a lasting peace across the Taiwan Straits and the participation of 
Taiwan in the specialized agencies of the United Nations.  It is a 
continuing absurdity that this country of 23 million people, a 
functioning  democracy  with a settled yearning for self -determination, 
a legitimate institutional expression of the Chinese civilisation with 
“first world” living standards, a land of peace and ingenuity, cannot 
12 | P a g e  
 be properly accommodated in the global bodies concerned with 
health, climate change, civil aviation, policing, and so forth.  [Surely, 
it is high time that this lingering mid-20th century issue be peacefully 
resolved so that the Taiwanese people can take their rightful place in 
the comity of nations. ] 
 
Similarly, it is long overdue f or the fractured relationship between the 
United States of America and Cuba be made whole in mutual respect, 
in accordance with international law, and consistent with the 
interests of both neighbours for peace, security, and shared 
prosperity . St. Vincent and the Grenadines implores the great 
American nation to listen and act upon the near -unanimous advice 
of this General Assembly which has repeatedly called for an end  to 
the oppressive, unlawful  embargo against Cuba. [My country has 
excellent bilateral relations with the USA and Cuba; it pains us 
greatly to see our friends and neighbours in  such a condition of 
extreme dissonance.  The continued stand -off makes no sense to us; 
and it does not benefit either side.  It is time to heal once and for all 
this hemispheric rupture from 1961 and  continuing. We in CARICOM 
are prepared to act as the healing balm of Gilead .] 
13 | P a g e  
  
Likewise, the recent ramping -up of tensions  between the USA and 
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela  is most unhelpful  to peace and 
stability in our Caribbean and Latin America.  St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines calls for the sealing  back of actions and rhetoric which 
are inimical to cordial, neighbouring  relations; in particu lar, we find 
the foreign militarisation of the waters around Venezuela  exceedingly 
troubling.  Repeatedly, the countries of the Caribbean and Latin 
America have unanimously declared our area a Zone of Peace ; we 
urge our American friends to abide by this declaration.  By all means, 
let us all cooperate in combating drug trafficking and allied 
trans national criminal activities, but a unilateral militarization is 
decidedly not the way to do it.  
 
In Haiti, matters political , economic, and social  continue to 
deteriorate; gang violence  continues unabated, and veritable  
Hobbesian  state of nature  exists in  which life is nasty, brutish and 
short. Haiti’s political and economic elites have been found wanting; 
but it is true, too, that the international community w ith the means 
to a ssist ha s not as yet summon ed up the will to do so  
14 | P a g e  
 disintere stedly, though in accord with the Haitian people’s deepest 
longings for peace, security and a normal civilized live and living. The 
UN Secuirty Council, with  CARICOM’s full support, is seized of this 
matter bu t an insuffici ency of resources and will have attended it. 
[The cynics  ask: Why is there such inordinate  attention paid to the 
tribal war in Ukra ine but so little, comparatively, bestowed upon the 
first independent Republic of  black people in this hemisphere? ] 
 
Your Excellencies, in November this year, the Conference of Parties 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC)  gather one more time, on this occasion in the great nation 
of Brazil.  The issue of climate change is urgent and existential.  The 
science is clear and there has been a growing, even overwhelming, 
global consensus as to what is required  to be done, but sadly some 
powerful, and other influential, countries , are back -sliding, and 
reneging on th eir earlier commitments.  [At Belem we must make 
concrete progress for the sake of our planet  Earth and for our 
children, grandchildren, and generations to come.  We cannot afford 
to fail; a terrible disaster will be fall Mother Earth and all its 
inhabitants if we fail. ] 
15 | P a g e  
  
[Looming, too, Excellencies, are the rising challenges of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI). This august Assembly must take the lead , urgently , 
in advancing a global compact to regulate AI so as to secure the 
benefits to be  derived therefrom, but at the same time to prevent its 
very harmful possibilities . The central question to be answered  
proactively is this: Will humanity control AI or will we allow AI to 
control us?  Our humanity  must always be prioriti sed.] 
 
Excellencies, just over a year ago, on July 1st, 2024, a category 4 
hurricane, Beryl, devastated  St. Vincent and the Grenadines; lives 
were lost; and damage and loss amounting to one -third of our Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) was incurred; in pa rticular, nearly 20 
percent of our houses were either severely damaged or destroyed.  We 
have been rebuilding and recovering stronger  and better than ever.  
We thank our regional and international partners, including worthy 
non-governmental entities, for their solidarity without which our 
tasks of reconstruction would have been even more onerous; we 
thank, too, our diaspora . But, to tell the truth, we have had to rely 
mainly on our own efforts at home. There is much, much more left to 
16 | P a g e  
 be done; and I again plead for the enhanced support of our friends, 
allies, and good Samaritans.  
 
[Since 2001, my country has been struck by twelve major weather 
events; volcanic eruptions in April 2021; the COVID -19 pandemic; 
the fall -out from the global economic depression of 2008 to 2010; the 
loss of preferential markets for our principal agricultural export; the 
knock -on effects of trade disruptions, tariff dislocations, the glaring 
contradictions of monopoly capitalism, the weaponising of 
currencies, and global turmoil;  and a multitude of other external 
shocks, including the damaging run-of-the-mill impacts of climate 
change.  Through it all, we have survived and thrived despite my 
country's inherent vulnerabilities and the historical legacies of 
underdevelopment wrought by native genocide,  the enslavement of 
African bodies, indentured labour, and colonial oppression. ]  Our 
people’s resilience, creativity, and disciplined endeavours have been 
a marvel to behold . This is a testimony to our people’s genius and the 
coming to the fore of our people’s hidden rationalities, their hitherto 
submerged resourc es and abilities,  a renaissance of their spirit, and 
the reaffirmation of the idea of St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  
17 | P a g e  
  
[But our efforts are always in danger of being undermined by the 
more egregious acts of commission and omission occasioned by the 
irresponsibility, and worse, of modern -day imperial giants and rising 
or risen hegemons, from the west and the east.  Still, more than ever, 
we require both  bilateral and multilateral solidarity in quest of peace, 
security, and shared prosperity. This is the plea not only of St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines, but of all small states globally which 
are disadvantaged by the very structu res of economic  dominance and 
global governance.  Thus, our demands for appropriate reformation. ] 
 
[I conclude with five reaffirmations for those from the dominant 
metropoles  of the west and the east, who may possess  the good sense 
to listen to friendly advice from a spokesperson from the periphery: 
First, do not think that our mouths will be muzzled by the food we 
eat to live;  secondly, know it well that while some sleep to dream, the 
rest of us dream to change the world for the better; thirdly, we have 
a voice and it will never be stilled; fourthly,, while we are not better 
than anyone, no one is better than us; and finally, we, too, have a 
history of civilised life and living with a trajectory for further 
18 | P a g e  
 advancement and ennoblement.  We are not appendages to any other 
nation; we are a free and independent people made in the image and 
likeness of God.  We are the embodiment of the idea of SVG! We are 
friends of all; and we strive for a better world! We are a small nation, 
demonstrably capable of mighty deeds! ] Excelencies, we, small 
states, have an important role to play i n global a ffairs for the 
betterment of all. Imp erial giants and hegemons must not hold us 
back. Together, we have an obligation not to desecrate our future.  
 
Thank you!  