 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA            
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
 
 
820 Second Avenue, 12th Floor   
New York, NY 10017   
Tel: 1 212 861 5656   
E-mail: Amission@angolaun. org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
    
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY 
 
         HIS EXCELLENCY JOÃO MANUEL GONÇALVES LOURENÇO , 
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA  
AND CHAIRPERSON OF THE AFRICAN UNION,  
 
AT THE 80TH SESSION  
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY,  
UNDER THE THEME “BETTER TOGETHER:  
80 YEARS AND BEYOND FOR PEACE, DEVELOPMENT  
AND HUMAN RIGHTS”  
 
 
 
New York, 23 September 2025  
 
 
 
        
 
Please check against delivery  
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 2 of 10    
 
 
- His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary -General of the United Nations,  
- Her Excellency Ms. Annalena Baerbock, President of the 80th United Nations General 
Assembly,  
- Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,  
- Distinguished Delegates,  
- Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
I stand before you today, in my capacity as President of the Republic of Angola and as 
Chairperson of the African Union, to speak of my country, to share our perspectives on the 
evolution of events unfolding in our increasingly turbulent world, and also to  address matters 
concerning Africa — a continent that mobilizes our energies and strengths as we strive to find 
solutions to finally awaken it once and for all to development.  
Allow me to congratulate Her Excellency Annalena Baerbock on her election to the high office 
of President of the United Nations General Assembly. I am convinced that her experience and 
the knowledge accumulated throughout the various functions she has so a bly performed will 
ensure the success of the work she assumed since the beginning of this month of September.  
I also extend congratulations to her predecessor, His Excellency Philémon Yang , for the 
assertive manner in which he led the General Assembly during the last year, placing his full 
commitment into ensuring this body functioned with commendable efficiency — a fact deserving 
recognition from us all for the positive results achieved th roughout his mandate.  
 
 
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 10    
 
I cannot miss to mention His Excellency António Guterres, Secretary -General of the United 
Nations, for the role he has played with great commitment, underpinned by his remarkable 
quality as a man of dialogue and peace in the midst of today’s geopolitical c omplexities.  
 
Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
Eighty years have passed since, compelled by the imperatives of that era, a group of countries 
and their respective leaders took the wise decision to found the United Nations. Since then, 
amidst both tumultuous and calmer times, this Organization has succe eded in fulfilling its great 
role: to maintain peace and global stability, to contribute to humanity’s development, and to 
preserve and deepen respect for human rights.  
This is a great achievement of the peoples of our planet that must not be disregarded nor 
underestimated by any power, political leader, or other authorities, under the threat of 
exacerbating divisions and egocentric interests, we squander the benefits of peace that were 
handed down to us by women and men who, over time, guided us here in an environment of 
harmony and global conciliation.  
The path has not always been linear, but in the most critical moments, wisdom prevailed over the 
worst impulses of large -scale conflagration — made possible through continuous dialogue as the 
only factor capable of smoothing differences, overcoming obstacl es, and calming the most 
troubled and belligerent spirits.  
Today, these lessons of the past are of inestimable value and must be the sole reference guiding 
us towards solutions to conflicts in Africa, Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and 
wherever else they may exist.  
 
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 4 of 10    
 
In the uncertain context in which we celebrate the UN’s 80th anniversary, the theme “Better 
Together: 80 Years and Beyond for Peace, Development and Human Rights” takes on a 
dimension that invites us to reflect on the profound meaning of the President of t he General 
Assembly’s call for a renewal of multilateralism and of solidarity -based action, within a 
framework of common and complementary efforts carried out by a more agile, effective, and 
accountable United Nations, as conceived in the Secretary -General ’s Initiative80 roadmap.  
In light of these perspectives, it is urgent that we revitalize the United Nations and bring it out of 
the intricate situation in which it finds itself, so that it may reclaim the active role it has always 
played and which proved of undeniable utility — ensuring that during the Cold War we did not 
feel as close to global conflagration as we do now, with the great dissonance that currently 
characterizes international relations.  
The major world powers tend to turn their backs on one another, moving away from the minimum 
points of convergence that would keep them bound to the commitment of privileging dialogue 
and concertation above all else.  
The challenges of today place us before a choice: to do everything to preserve peace, or to face 
war with all its consequences, thus compromising the future of humanity.  
Those world powers that in the past played a crucial role in liberating Europe and the Europeans 
from the grip of Nazism and Fascism, and in liberating Africa and Africans from South Africa’s 
apartheid regime, cannot now behave differently — by attacking o ther countries, invading and 
annexing foreign territories, or even financing and organizing subversion that can lead to the 
overthrow of legitimate governments, as we currently witness on our own continent.  
With such a dangerous precedent, no regional, continental, or global institution will henceforth 
have the moral authority to call to order any State that violates the principles enshrined in the 
United Nations Charter and in international law.  
 
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 5 of 10    
 
We Africans, from countries colonized for centuries, understand better than anyone the 
importance of peace, as we face daily struggles to provide food, drinking water, health, education, 
and other essential goods — giving us a heightened sensitivity to the  harmful impact of insecurity 
and instability on the realization of our development objectives and projects.  
This reality is further aggravated by the multiple conflicts and wars afflicting countries and 
regions of the world from which we had expected cooperation and fruitful exchange to help us 
overcome our difficulties and contribute, with our immense resources  and capacities, to global 
prosperity.  
It is on this basis that the Republic of Angola has sought to make an honest and genuine 
contribution to resolving the conflict in the Sahel region, in Sudan, and in the eastern Democratic 
Republic of the Congo. With respect to the latter, our efforts crea ted a negotiating framework 
with peace solutions that unfortunately did not materialize in December 2024 as expected, but 
which remains a valid platform for other ongoing efforts aimed at putting a definitive end to that 
conflict.  
Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
This conflict and so many others we recall are, to a large extent, the consequence of the passivity 
of United Nations Member States, which have often proven inoperative in the face of invasions 
of third -party territories and interference in the internal or der of sovereign countries. These, in 
recent years, have not been met with firm, inflexible, and assertive reactions, and have thus 
become faits accomplis  at the epicenter of the major tensions that characterize today’s world.  
The consequences are before our very eyes, in the Middle East, where the systematic non -
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions on the creation of the State of Palestine 
keeps alive a conflict that worsens daily and seems far from resolution,  given Israel’s 
disproportionate and violent retaliatory actions. While Israel has the right to exist as a State and 
to demand the release of those still held hostage from the tragic events of October 7, it cannot be  
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 6 of 10    
 
allowed to pursue in Palestine — and particularly in Gaza — a policy of extermination of a 
people.  
The Palestinian people cannot be equated with Hamas, for there are no “terrorist peoples,” much 
less “terrorist children.” They have exactly the same right to an independent and sovereign State, 
where they can assert their culture, safeguard their future, and open predictable and secure 
prospects for their youth.  
Concerns over this conflict are compounded by the silence, hesitations, and timid reactions of 
the international community, which appear to legitimize the expansion of war to neighboring 
countries, inexorably eroding the authority of the United Nations.  
Nothing is worse than the exclusion of the Palestinian delegation from this forum, where it had 
the right to make its voice heard as a Member State under the terms of the Headquarters 
Agreement.  
The failure to guarantee the presence of the President of the Palestinian Authority at this General 
Assembly sends a highly negative signal, as it encourages the continuation of the genocide to 
which we all bear witness helplessly and with impunity, delays  resolution of the problem, and 
complicates ongoing efforts to end this intricate conflict.  
We vehemently condemn this unilateral position, contrary to the principles governing the United 
Nations, just as we call for the unconditional lifting of the unjust and prolonged embargo against 
Cuba, which has had grave consequences for the Cuban economy and people, who struggle daily 
to resist a punishment rejected by the international community.  
Cuba, which played an important role in the struggle of African peoples that led to the downfall 
of the racist and inhumane apartheid regime in South Africa, and which was a signatory to the 
New York Peace Agreement of 22 December 1988 that brought freedom  to the South African 
people and led to Namibia’s independence, cannot arbitrarily and unilaterally be considered a 
State sponsor of terrorism in light of the relevant United Nations resolutions.  
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 7 of 10    
 
This model of action by a small group of countries, incompatible with minimally acceptable 
global coexistence standards, lies at the origin of the unilateral sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe 
and Venezuela, which produce no other result than the suffering of t heir populations, who, in a 
spirit of great patriotism, end up uniting in defense of their nations.  
Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
The authority of this Organization, whose foundations lie in the United Nations Charter and 
international law, must urgently be restored, without narratives that highlight a logic of double 
standards, so that just solutions can be sought for the war in Ukr aine or reinforced through the 
perspectives since the Alaska meeting.  
Ukraine, b eing a European country, after President Trump pragmatically met with President 
Putin — without prejudice to the need for direct negotiations between Russia and Ukraine — it 
would have been expected that European leaders, in the interest of peace and security in  Europe, 
would  have  also s ought  dialogue not only with President Zelensky, but also with President Putin.  
We cannot afford to squander this opportunity; otherwise, we risk witnessing an escalation of 
unpredictable proportions and consequences — not only in Europe, where living forces must 
abandon the dangerous calculations rooted in the notion of military vict ory through weakening 
the adversary’s capabilities.  
Given today’s difficulties and the crisis the world is going through, the UN must reemerge and 
become more proactive to prevent its role as the main entity of global governance from 
dissolving, turning it into an institution incapable of ensuring world peace. It is our responsibility 
as States and sovereign Nations not to let it succumb.  
The United Nations, in its current form, is the only organization with the capacity to act on behalf 
of us all in search of global consensus for peace, and with the legitimacy to call to order Member 
States that distort its founding principles through thei r conduct in the international arena.  
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 8 of 10    
 
Therefore, we must preserve it at all costs and adapt it to contemporary realities, through urgent 
reforms.  
In this very particular regard, I advocate for the reform of the Security Council, in line with the 
African common position enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, 
adopted twenty years ago, which call for two permanent seats and five  non-permanent seats for 
Africa in an enlarged Security Council — one that is more representative and aligned with 
contemporary geopolitical reality.  
Without this essential step, whose delay is increasingly unjustifiable, we cannot ensure the 
implementation of the Pact for the Future adopted last year, which recognized the urgent need to 
endow the United Nations with a more democratic and balanced Secur ity Council.  
This Pact represents a major opportunity to revitalize multilateralism, making it more 
comprehensive, serving as a broad -based platform for discussions on sensitive issues of the 
contemporary world — among them, financing for development and the climate ch allenge.  
On matters relating to development aid, there is much to discuss, but it is fair to highlight the 
recent steps taken with the adoption of the Seville Commitment, reached at the 4th Conference 
on Financing for Development. This agreement calls for the urgent reform of International 
Financial In stitutions, to make them more representative, inclusive, and capable of responding to 
the pressing needs of developing countries, especially those in Africa.  
I am convinced that this instrument, together with the Pact for the Future, the United Nations Tax 
Convention, and the United Nations Debt Convention — still under discussion — will 
collectively function as a political, financial, and normative platform gi ving significant impetus 
to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
 
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 9 of 10    
 
Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
It is essential that we address the climate crisis as the greatest existential threat of our time, 
against which we can only achieve results if we act together, in a coordinated and solidarity -
based manner.  
In light of the continuous worsening of global warming and increasingly violent and frequent 
natural disasters, it has become imperative that those nations that reaped the greatest benefits 
from past industrial and economic development fully assume their h istorical responsibility. In a 
gesture of climate justice, they must guarantee adequate financing, technology transfer, and 
support for adaptation and mitigation to developing countries.  
Those countries whose contribution to greenhouse gas emissions are residual are the ones 
disproportionately — and virtually alone — facing the impacts of climate change, global 
warming, and their devastating effects on agriculture, food security, and public health.  
In the face of such evidence and the responsibilities arising therefrom, Angola remains 
committed to the Paris Agreement and to the implementation of adaptation and mitigation 
measures, aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda and the African Union’s Ag enda 2063. 
These frameworks embody the consensus on mobilizing predictable and accessible climate 
financing to ensure a just energy transition and protect the most vulnerable communities.  
This cross -cutting issue, which demands ever -greater responsibility both from public agendas 
and from large industrial corporations, will receive due attention at COP30, to be held shortly in 
Brazil. Hosting, for the second time, such an event illustrates Brazil’s strong commitment and 
engagement with environmental issues.  
 
 
 
 
    REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA       
 
           Permanent Mission of the R epublic of Angola to the United Nations  
 
 
 
Page 10 of 10    
 
In 1992, in Rio de Janeiro, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was 
inaugurated — a paradigm that has proved immensely valuable for increasingly profound 
discussions  that still ongoing today, and which will surely allow us, at the upcoming Conference, 
to take another step forward on this long path we must travel to achieve the great climate 
objectives desired by humanity.  
Excellencies,  
Eighty years since the founding of the United Nations and after the end of the Cold War, our 
expectation had been to live in a world free from today’s uncertainties, less dangerous than the 
one we currently observe.  
Until 1991, we lived in the context of a pronounced division between two ideologically opposing 
blocs. Yet, paradoxically, this framework offered a more predictable outlook, less susceptible to 
sliding into large -scale confrontation.  
This retrospective must not lead us to believe that world stability is only possible within rigid 
divisions of any kind. Rather, it must push us towards building a framework of balanced interests 
and shared concerns on matters of global security, capable o f generating complementarities and 
convergences of all kinds, within a multilateral environment — the only path capable of saving 
us from catastrophe.  
Thank you.  
 