1 
 Draft  
25.09.2025  
Check against delivery  
 
STATEMENT  
 
by H.E. Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan  
 
General Debate of the 80th Session  
of the United Nations General Assembly  
 
New York, 25 September 2025   
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
For many years, I spoke from this tribune about the tragedies of aggression, 
occupation , and injustice experienced by Azerbaijan. Today, I will speak about 
our long road to victory and peace, and a new era in Azerbaijan’s history, about 
how we managed to end the occupation through a liberation war, and how we 
won peace by political means.  
 
For nearly three decades , almost twenty percent of Azerbaijan’s sovereign 
territory remained under military occupation by Armenia. One million  Azerbaijanis 
were expelled from their homes as a result of the policy of ethnic cleansing and 
war crimes conducted by Armenia. Their fundamental human rights were grossly 
violated. Four United Nations Security Council resolutions, adopted in 1993, 
demanded  the immediate, complete, and unconditional withdrawal of Armenian 
armed forces from the occupied territories. Sa dly, these resolutions were never 
implemented. Armenia demonstratively ignored them because no sanctions were 
imposed on it by the international community.  
 
The OSCE Minsk Group, established in 1992 to facilitate a settlement, has failed 
in its mission. Instead of enforcing the norms and principles of international law, 
its co -chairs sought to preserve the status quo and keep the conflict frozen.  
 
2 
 In 2020, after almost 30 years of ineffective negotiations, Azerbaijan was forced 
to exercise its legitimate right to self -defense under Article 51 of the UN Charter. 
During the war, Armenia shelled our towns and cities with ballistic missiles and 
cluster munitions , killing more than a hundred innocent civilians. Azerbaijan, in its 
turn, conducted the war in strict compliance with international humanitarian law. 
We ensured the protection of civilians and refrained from targeting non -military 
infrastructure.  In the 44-Day Patriotic War, our armed forces liberated occupied 
territories and restored Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity in accordance with 
international law and relevant UN Security Council resolutions.  
 
The 10 November 2020 marked the capitulation of Armenia and restoration of 
Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity after nearly 30 years of occupation.  
 
Right after our victorious war, Azerbaijan declared its readiness to open a new 
page in relations with Armenia based on mutual recognition of territorial integrity 
and sovereignty. We proposed five basic principles rooted in international law. We 
tabled th e proposal for a Peace Treaty. Then we initiated a negotiation process 
on its draft text, which lasted from October 2022 to summer 2025. Despite several 
attempts to derail the process, the negotiations produced positive results, as they 
were conducted on a  strict bilateral basis, free from any kind of external 
interference.  
 
On August 8 this year , the Foreign Ministers of Azerbaijan and Armenia in 
Washington, in the White House, in the presence of the leaders of the United 
States, Azerbaijan and Armenia initialed the text of the peace agreement. The 
same day , the President of Azerbaijan and the Prime Minister of Armenia signed 
the Joint Declaration. President of the United States Donald Trump also signed it 
as a witness. Moreover, Azerbaijan and Armenia jointly appealed for the closure 
of the OSCE Minsk Group and related structures, as an obsolete m echanism no 
longer relevant to the peace process. Accordingly, on 1 September, the OSCE 
adopted a decision to permanently close these structures.  
 
Regional connectivity has been at the core of our vision for lasting peace. Another 
key outcome of the Washington Summit is the “Trump Route for International 
Peace and Prosperity” (TRIPP), which will ensure unimpeded access through the 
Zangazur corridor a nd foster regional connectivity.  
3 
  
The recent Washington Summit has also signaled a new phase in Azerbaijan -US 
relations. Together with President Donald Trump, we signed the Memorandum of 
Understanding between the two governments regarding the establishment of a 
Strategic Working Group to d evelop a Charter on strategic partnership between 
Azerbaijan and the United States. It opens new horizons for partnership in 
political, economic, energy, regional connectivity, defense, security, and other 
fields.  
 
The waiver by President Trump of the sanctions imposed on Azerbaijan in 1992, 
in the form of  the Section 907 of the Freedom Support Act, is a historic step as 
well. The permanent removal of Section 907 by the US Congress would eliminate 
a legacy of double standards and help strengthen trust and cooperation at a time 
when Azerbaijan is contributing to  global security and stability.  
 
Overall, the agreements reached during my August visit to the United States carry 
historic significance.  
 
I want to express my gratitude to President Donald Trump for opening a new 
chapter in the US -Azerbaijan relationship, for his decision to elevate it to the 
strategic partnership level, and for his support to the peace process between 
Azerbaijan and Armenia . 
 
Right after the victory in the Patriotic War of 2020, Azerbaijan started the large -
scale reconstruction program in the liberated territories. During the time of 
occupation , Armenia levelled to the ground hundreds of Azerbaijani cities and 
villages, deliberately ruined 65 mosques. That was the policy of Armenia, which 
was ruled by war criminals for almost 30 years. We are rebuilding villages and 
cities razed to the ground. Un der the Great Return Program, already more than 
50,000 people live, work , and study in the liberated territories.  
 
One of the gravest humanitarian challenges facing Azerbaijan in the post -conflict 
period is the landmine contamination during the time of Armenian occupation. 
Since November 2020, more than 400 Azerbaijani civilians and military personnel 
were  killed or seriously injured by landmine explosions. This massive 
4 
 contamination obstructs the safe return of displaced persons and delays 
reconstruction projects.  
 
Similarly, the tragic fate of nearly four thousand Azerbaijanis who went missing 
during the Armenian aggression and occupation since the early 1990s continues 
to require close attention and action.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
Coming to the global challenges we are facing, we believe that the response must 
be inclusive, fair , and universal.  
 
Back in 2022 at the Summit of the Caspian Littoral States I raised the issue of 
environmental degradation of the Caspian Sea. Today situation is much worse. 
Caspian Sea is shrinking rapidly. The main reason is not climate change. Joint 
efforts of littoral states are needed to stop ecological catastrophe with 
unpredictable consequences. Azerbaijan also is ready to cooperation closely with 
the UN to tackle this problem.  
 
Through its many initiatives, Azerbaijan has shown its clear commitment to 
advancing sustainable solutions to global challenges.  
 
Azerbaijan is proud to have hosted COP29 last year, where we achieved 
important outcomes in advancing climate action, the green transition, and 
equitable access to financing. As the host of COP29, we guided negotiations 
towards ambitious and balanced outco mes, ensuring that all voices, particularly 
those of the developing world, were heard.  
 
The adoption of the  New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG)  at COP29, also 
known as the  Baku Finance Goal, is a historic milestone in global climate finance. 
This commitment brings the previous 100 billion USD annual climate finance goal 
to at least 300 billion USD per year  through  2035 from public sources in 
developed countries to developing countries. Azerbaijan also successfully 
finalized the long -awaited framework for carbon markets under Article 6 of the 
Paris Agreement, making the Paris Agreement fully operational nine years after 
its adoption. Several key agreements were signed at COP29 to make the Loss 
5 
 and Damage Fund fully operational, providing critical support for vulnerable 
communities impacted by climate change.   
 
Being strongly committed to the green transition, we at the same time should not 
put unrealistic targets in front of us. The world cannot live without fossil fuels today 
and in  foreseeable future.  
 
Energy security is closely linked to peace, regional connectivity, and economic 
development. Azerbaijan continues to play a proactive role in advancing these 
objectives globally. Azerbaijan has established itself as a reliable and 
indispensable partner in providing energy security to many countries. We  play a 
strategic role connecting the Caspian region with international markets through a 
diversified oil and gas pipeline system s.  
 
As of today, we are supplying natural gas to 14 countries. This ranks Azerbaijan 
as the top country in the world in terms of the number of countries it supplies with 
pipeline gas. This reflects our strategic role in enhancing energy security and 
diversifying supply routes across Europe and beyond. Moreover, Azerbaijan and 
Syria have recently strengthened their bilateral partnership, focusing on energy 
supply, infrastructure development, and post -conflict reconstruction. Since 
August this year , Azerbaijan started to supply Syria with natural gas via Türkiye, 
significantly reducing its electricity shortages.  
 
Azerbaijan also attracts large investments in renewable energy sources like solar, 
wind, and hydro power. Almost 40 % of our energy will be generated by 
renewables by 2030.    
 
Connectivity projects, like the East -West and North -South Corridors, cross our 
country. We have witnessed almost 90% growth in cargo volumes through the 
Middle Corridor since 2022. The transit time along the Corridor have been 
significantly reduced.  The biggest trade fleet in the Caspian, Alat International 
Trade Port  with its annual capacity reaching 25 million tons in the near future, the 
Baku -Tbilisi -Kars railroad, 9 international airports, the biggest air -cargo company 
in the region, and many other factors have turned Azerbaijan into one of the 
international transport hubs.  
 
6 
 There is a great potential for cooperation in digital connectivity. Azerbaijan leads 
the digital transformation initiative through such ambitious projects as the Digital 
Silk Way. This project includes plans for an advanced fiber -optic cable network 
under the Caspian Sea, establishing Azerbaijan as a key regional digital hub.  
 
Azerbaijan achieved significant economic growth by focusing on diversifying its 
economy beyond oil and gas, developing the non -oil sector, and improving the 
investment climate through reforms and transparency. Reducing poverty and 
unemployment to a historic low of 5% is another achievement of our country.  
 
Recently, two major international rating agencies (Moody’s and Fitch) have 
increased Azerbaijan’s ranking. Azerbaijan was provided with a favorable 
investment -grade status, citing very strong external balance, low public debt, and 
substantial sovereign wealth assets as key strengths. This underscores our 
economic resilience, strong fiscal discipline, and favorable investment climate. 
Our for eign debt is only 6.5% of GDP, which is one of the lowest in the world. 
Azerbaijan’s foreign exchange reserves exceed its foreign debt almost 16 times.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
Azerbaijan is proud of its global humanitarian assistance efforts. We are providing 
aid to countries affected by natural disasters, conflicts, and public health 
emergencies. Azerbaijan contributed to the COVID -19 response, donating  and 
financing  protective equipment, medical devices, and vaccines to over 80 
countries in need.  
 
Azerbaijan has entered a new era. We won, both war and peace. We ended the 
occupation and started reconstruction. Justice has triumphed, sovereignty has 
been consolidated, and peace is de-facto  reached. We stand prepared to share 
our positive experience.  
 
The achievements of recent years are not only a victory and success for 
Azerbaijan. They are also a demonstration that international law must ultimately 
prevail.  
 
7 
 Our vision is clear: peace and development based upon international law, non -
interference in the internal affairs of States, mutual respect , and cooperation.  
 
Let us together build a world without double standards, where justice is not 
selective, the rule of law is respected, and peace is achieved not through words 
alone, but through actions.  
 
Thank you.  
 