SPEECH BY H.E AMB. EDOUARD BIZIMANA, MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, REGIONAL INTERGRATION AND DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AT THE 80TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY NEY -YORK, SEPTEMBER 22 – 30, 2025 ____________________________________________________ Madam Annalena Baerbock, President of the 80th session of the Assembly General of the United Nations, Mr. Secretary General, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 1. I am speaking on behalf of the President of the Republic of Burundi, His Excellency Evariste NDAYISHIMIYE who did me the honor of representing him at these meetings and thus being able to express the point of view of Burundi on the occasion of this 80th anniversary of our Organization which we are celebrating under the theme: “United, stronger: 80 years old and more for peace, development and human rights.” 2. Allow me first to express my warm congratulations to Mrs. Annalena Baerbock for her brilliant election as President of the 80th session of the General Assembly. Ms. Baerbock, you can naturally count on the full cooperation of Burundi in the accomplishment of your noble and exhilarating mission. 3. At the same time, allow me to pay a well-deserved tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Philémon Yang, for his admirable professional and personal qualities, and for the exceptionally professional manner in which he chaired the 79th session which we have just successfully closed. 2 4. Finally, I salute the courage of Mr. Antonio Guterres who, since becoming Secretary General of our common Organization, has continued to advocate for the reform of the United Nations operating system in order to increase its effectiveness and credibility. You have the support and encouragement of Burundi, Mr. Secretary General. Madam President, Mr. Secretary General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 5. 80 years ago, the United Nations was born in a world ravaged by war, with the primary mission of preserving peace, fostering cooperation between States and promoting human rights. However, given what is happening today in certain corners of the world, there is reason to wonder whether the UN remains on this trajectory. Today, as we celebrate this anniversary, I am honored to reaffirm Burundi's attachment to these founding ideals, the very ones which have guided the Charter of our Organization since 1945. This shows the importance of the theme that brings us together this year. Far from being a simple slogan, this theme refers to a historical necessity, a moral commitment, and an essential path towards a shared future. 6. Indeed, since its creation, the UN has made a significant contribution to maintaining peace, accompanied waves of decolonization, highlighted international law and promoted the universality of human rights. It has fostered cooperation among nations and inspired generations of leaders and people. Burundi, once a beneficiary of this international solidarity, is today an active contributor, whether through its peacekeeping troops, its diplomatic engagement or its voice within multilateral forums. 3 7. Furthermore, Burundi is a living example of resilience and rediscovered peace. Our nation has gone through very difficult times but, through and thanks to the will of its people and its strengthened institutions, it has been able to turn the page on conflicts and has chosen the path of reconciliation, stability and mutual respect. We have established national mechanisms for transitional justice, with a Truth and Reconciliation Commission which continues its work with great dedication, seriousness and courage so that future generations can build on solid foundations, without hatred or spirit of revenge. 8. Elections legislative and municipal elections that we have just organized this summer in transparency and in accordance with all electoral rules, constitute one of the proofs of renewed peace, of the democratic maturity of the Burundian people and of the solidity of our institutions. 9. In terms of human rights, we reaffirm our commitment to constructive dialogue, respect for cultural diversity and cooperation based on trust, and not on stigma. As a member of the Human Rights Council, Burundi will always oppose any form of hierarchy and political exploitation of human rights. 10. In this regard, we denounce the special mechanisms which are sometimes imposed on certain countries, including Burundi, for rather subjective reasons. This is why I reiterate Burundi's request to withdraw the initiative to extend the mandate of the famous special rapporteur for human rights in my country who for 10 years has published biased and tendentious reports on Burundi as if Burundi and time have since remained frozen. Madam President, 4 11. In Burundi, we have made remarkable efforts to strengthen the rule of law, fight against impunity and promote civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. Notable progress has been recognized by several partners, both bilateral and multilateral, as evidenced by our constructive cooperation with the latter. However, the special rapporteur does not seem to notice these advances. 12. But, as everyone knows, peace cannot be lasting without development. This is why Burundi is resolutely committed to the implementation of the SDGs, with particular attention paid to agriculture with a view to real food security, access to education for all, health, energy, the empowerment of women and young people, preservation of the environment, etc. 13. It is this spirit that underpins our Vision of a Burundi emerging in 2040 and developed in 2060. A Vision fully aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and which constitutes the concrete expression of our desire to build an inclusive, resilient and prosperous future, where each citizen will be able to fully flourish and actively contribute to the sustainable development of their country. Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen, 14. In celebrating eight decades of our common Organization, we cannot turn a blind eye to the tensions, the open or latent conflicts, the horrors that we observe in Gaza, in the DRC, in Sudan, in the Sahel and in many other places on the planet. The violence we are witnessing in recent times, and especially the indifference and cynicism that accompany it, have reached such a degree that we can sometimes wonder where our humanity has gone; our empathy; our sense of duty; our commitment to cooperate for a better world. 5 15. Faced with this situation, Burundi deeply believes that only a renewed and equitable multilateralism can provide lasting responses to the multiple crises we face. Geopolitical calculations pushing for indifference, inaction, “double standards” or selfishness, lead us to the abyss. This is why Burundi is calling for peace. To true peace; that is to say, one which is neither selective nor subject to selfish interests. The peace that Burundi wants is that based on law, dialogue and respect for the sovereignty of States. Madam President, 16. Neither peace nor human rights can prosper without social justice, without equity between nations. This is why Burundi stands alongside its African partners and advocates for fairer representation of Africa within decision-making bodies, particularly the Security Council. It's a condition of legitimacy and effectiveness. How can an entire continent that contributes so much to the life and efforts of the UN be ignored? Africa remains the only continent that has not had a permanent seat on the Security Council for 80 years. 17. In this regard, Burundi welcomes the ambition of the UN80 initiative to strengthen the effectiveness, coherence and relevance of the United Nations system. We share the conviction that, 80 years after its founding, our Organization needs a lucid and bold modernization. 18. However, we would like to highlight the concerns expressed by many countries in the Global South, and particularly in Africa. It is essential that this reform remains driven by the Member States, 6 in a spirit of geographical equity, transparency, multilingualism and respect for regional priorities. 19. Development, economic and social rights, the fight against inequalities, climate action and international solidarity must under no circumstances be relegated to the background in the name of rationalization. A more effective UN, yes; a UN reduced to technocratic or budgetary logic, no. 20. Furthermore, no reform of the United Nations system can ignore the question of its political governance. We recall that the reform of the Security Council, awaited for decades, remains a requirement of justice. Africa, with its united voice through the Ezulwini Consensus, demands to correct this historical injustice and to be fairly represented within decision-making bodies. This is not a favor but an absolute right if the UN wants to remain consistent with itself. 21. In summary, Burundi supports ambitious reform, provided that it is inclusive, fair, balanced, and oriented towards the real needs of the people, and not shaped by external priorities. Madam President, 22. In this drive to rebuild multilateralism based on justice, dialogue and truth, the recognition of historical injustices is essential as an essential basis for building lasting peace. 23. This is why Burundi wishes to reaffirm the importance of recognition of the genocide committed against the Hutu of Burundi in 1972, an issue already brought to the attention of this United Nations General Assembly during its 79th session. Memory, truth and reconciliation are powerful levers for the reconstruction of societies and the consolidation of peace. Silence cannot be an option when it comes to restoring the dignity of victims and preventing a repeat of past tragedies. Thus, Burundi humbly requests the support of all Member States of the United Nations in the process of recognition of this genocide. 24. Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm Burundi's desire and its call to move forward together for a common future. This 80th session represents much more than an anniversary. She is a call. We are at a crossroads. The 80th session of our General Assembly must be the moment of moral resurgence, of refoundation of solidarity, and of the reminder of our common humanity. The UN of tomorrow must be one of equity, justice and action. It must reflect the realities of the contemporary world, hear all voices and build lasting peace for present and future generations, as stipulated in the preamble to the United Nations Charter. 25. Burundi is ready to continue to make its active contribution to the search for and maintenance of peace, to the consolidation of the values ​​of equitable and inclusive development, solidarity, mutual respect and peaceful coexistence. Because yes, it is together, better together, that we can preserve peace, guarantee human rights and ensure a dignified future for our children. The credibility and seriousness of our common organization are at stake. I you thank you.