1 
 S T A T E M E N T  
by 
H.E. Mr. Rossen Jeliazkov , Prime Minister  of the Republic of Bulgaria  
80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
General Debate, 26 September 2025 
 
MADAM PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,  
MR. SECRETARY-GENERAL,  
EXCELLENCIES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,  
 It is with great respect that I extend my warmest congratulations to Her 
Excellency Annalena Baerbock on her election as President of the 80th 
Session of the United Nations General Assembly. Your commitment to 
strengthening peace, advancing sustainable development and upholding 
human rights aligns deeply with Bulgaria’s own values and aspirations. 
 In Bulgaria, we carry a simple truth at the heart of our identity: “Unity 
Makes Strength”.  These words are more than a motto — they are a legacy 
born of struggle and solidarity. They echo through our history, from the 
forging of our independence to the building of our democratic 
institutions. And today, in a world shaken by division and conflicts, this 
principle feels more urgent than ever. The challenges we face — from 
contested global narratives and eroding trust in international institutions 
to stalled development, financial instability, and shrinking humanitarian 
space — do not respect borders. They demand a united response. 
Bulgaria’s creed is a message we offer to the world: that hope lies not in 
isolation, but in coming together. 
 Bulgaria reaffirms its commitment to effective multilateralism  and to 
the rules-based international order , with the United Nations at its 
core. For 80 years, the UN has been a beacon of hope, a platform for 
dialogue and peace. And this year, in 2025, Bulgaria marks 70 years of 
membership. Over seven decades, Bulgaria has stood alongside fellow 
2 
 member states in pursuit of the UN’s founding ideals, contributing to 
peacekeeping, sustainable development, and the protection of human 
rights. As we celebrate this milestone, we renew our pledge to the UN 
Charter and to a future defined not by division, but by unity and the 
strength it brings. 
 For the UN to meet the tests of our time, reform is not a choice but an 
imperative. Bulgaria fully support the Secretary-General’s UN80 
initiative for mandate reviews, structural reform, and more effective use 
of resources. Equally urgent is completing ongoing reforms in 
development, management, peace and security, and advancing the 
“Humanitarian Reset” for stronger, locally led action with sustainable 
financing. 
 At the institutional level, we believe that the Security Council must be 
reformed  to reflect today’s world—more effective, more representative, 
and more accountable. We need genuine progress, including a fairer 
balance in membership, one additional non-permanent seat be allocated 
to the Eastern European Group, and limits on the misuse of the veto. The 
General Assembly must remain the heart of this Organization — our 
shared forum for dialogue and decision-making.  
Excellencies,  
 Ever since the adoption of the UN Charter, international peace and 
security have never been more threatened. 
 Russia’s full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine, with its far-reaching 
global repercussions, represents an existential challenge to the rules-
based international order. This is not merely a European conflict — it 
threatens the very legitimacy of the United Nations. It is utterly 
unacceptable that a founding UN member with a permanent Security 
Council seat wages war while disregarding international humanitarian 
and human rights law. The only path to peace is clear: Ukraine’s 
sovereignty must be respected, and its territorial integrity fully restored. 
A full, immediate, and unconditional ceasefire is essential. In recent 
weeks Russia is escalating and conducting flagrant violations of EU 
Member States and NATO Allies sovereign airspace by drones and planes. 
These actions demonstrate that Russia is the one undermining the 
prospects of peace. These actions cannot be tolerated and are meeting 
our strong, collective resolve and response. 
3 
  The need for urgent action is clear in the  Middle East.  The brutal Hamas 
attack of 7 October 2023, and the devastating conflict that followed, have 
caused immense human suffering. Bulgaria mourns the loss of every 
innocent life—Israeli and Palestinian alike. In Gaza, tens of thousands of 
civilians have been killed, neighborhoods destroyed, and countless 
people displaced. We must not allow this tragedy to leave a permanent 
scar on humanity’s conscience.  
 A sustainable ceasefire and credible political process are urgently 
needed. Only a two-state solution, grounded in international law and 
mutual recognition, can secure a just and lasting peace, allowing Israelis 
and Palestinians to live side by side in dignity and security. 
 The crisis in the Middle East and North Africa is interconnected and 
threatens regional stability. Yemen faces famine and disease, Syria 
needs an inclusive, UN-led dialogue for a democratic transition, and 
Sudan teeters on the brink amid ongoing fighting and mass displacement. 
Instability in Libya and the Sahel shows how weak institutions allow 
conflicts to spread. Bulgaria calls for a new regional security architecture, 
led by the UN, grounded in diplomacy, respect for sovereignty, and long-
term investment in peace and development. 
 Nuclear non-proliferation , disarmament , and arms control remain 
central to our collective security. We condemn rhetoric and actions that 
threaten stability and stress the need for renewed diplomacy. Iran must 
fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and ensure 
the peaceful nature of its nuclear program, while all parties work to de-
escalate tensions through diplomacy. Likewise, the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea must dismantle its programs for weapons of mass 
destruction and ballistic missiles in a complete, verifiable, and 
irreversible way, in accordance with international law and Treaty 
obligations. 
Distinguished delegates,  
 Bulgaria consistently upholds the principles of the United Nations at the 
regional level, engaging actively with the South-East European 
Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, and the 
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation. We prioritize good-
neighborliness, human rights, and the strengthening of trade, energy, 
transport, and digital connectivity.  
4 
  Bulgaria firmly supports the European integration of the Western 
Balkans, based on merit as the path to peace, stability, and prosperity. 
The Black Sea region remains strategically important for European 
security and energy resilience, and Bulgaria works to make it a space of 
stability and sustainable development. On 1 July 2025, Bulgaria assumed 
the chairmanships of the South-East European Cooperation Process and 
the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation, strengthening 
our leadership in advancing regional security, stability, and resilience. 
 
Excellencies,  
 Bulgaria firmly believes that human rights  are universal, indivisible, 
interdependent, and interconnected. Our policies are grounded in this 
understanding, guiding our efforts to protect and promote human dignity 
at home and globally. 
 As a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council for 2024–2026, 
Bulgaria is committed to advance human rights through dialogue and 
cooperation. We prioritize gender equality and the empowerment of 
women and girls, in line with international human rights instruments and 
the Women, Peace and Security agenda. In all conflict prevention, peace 
processes, and post-conflict recovery, women must be at the center, with 
their protection and access to justice ensured. 
 We stress the need to empower young people and children, ensuring their 
meaningful participation in decision-making, including on climate action 
and heritage preservation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Sustainable development  cannot be separated from human rights, 
peace, and security. We remain fully committed to implementing the 2030 
Agenda and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals.  On 23 July 2025, 
Bulgaria presented its Second Voluntary National Review at the High-
Level Political Forum, highlighting national progress, government 
actions, and stakeholder engagement. For the first time, a Bulgarian youth 
delegate contributed, sharing the perspective of young people on the 
implementation of the Goals.  
 We know that accelerating progress requires stronger political will, 
inclusive participation of civil society, academia, the private sector, and 
youth, and urgent action to address social, economic, and environmental 
5 
 challenges. We look forward to the upcoming World Social Summit , 
where diverse voices and all stakeholders can come together to renew the 
global social contract and ensure it reflects human rights for all. 
 Financing  is key aspects of develepment. Adequate, predictable, and 
innovative resources are essential to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Bulgaria supports mobilizing domestic resources, 
engaging the private sector, and building local partnerships. We welcome 
the first Biennial Summit for a Sustainable, Inclusive, and Resilient 
Global Economy , held on 24 September 2025 here in New York, which 
reinforced commitments from the Fourth International Conference on 
Financing for Development and strengthened cooperation with 
multilateral financial institutions. 
 For its part, Bulgaria remains a steadfast contributor to global 
development. Through the National Development Program “Bulgaria 
2030” and our development cooperation policy, we implement tangible 
projects and build sustainable partnerships for a fairer, more balanced 
world. In all our efforts, we prioritize poverty eradication, sustainability, 
and equality, focusing on key regions — the Western Balkans, the Eastern 
Partnership countries, the Middle East, North Africa, and Asia — with 
special attention to education, health, and building resilient societies. 
 Digital governance  and new technologies  are central to our efforts. 
Bulgaria supports inclusive, multistakeholder approaches to global 
digital governance, artificial intelligence, and space technologies, 
ensuring they advance the Sustainable Development Goals.  We 
emphasize the need for open and secure internet, protection of human 
rights, and digital inclusion. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 Sustainable development cannot happen without urgent climate action. 
Social and economic progress depends on protecting our planet. Climate-
related extreme events will become more frequent and severe around the 
world. At the same time, Europe is the fastest warming continent  and 
climate risks are accelerating threatening its energy and food security, 
ecosystems, infrastructure, water resources, financial stability, and 
people’s health. The economic losses have already been estimated in 
billions of euro. My country Bulgaria is no exception and it is among the 
most affected countries by draughts, forest fires and floods.  
6 
  Bulgaria fully supports the Paris Agreement, calls for ambitious 
contributions at COP30, and emphasizes international cooperation to 
safeguard oceans, manage marine resources sustainably, and ensure 
long-term environmental, economic, and social resilience. 
Excellencies,  
 The journey ahead is long, but our resolve must be unwavering. Let us 
commit, once again, to working hand-in-hand, to upholding the principles 
of the UN Charter, and to ensuring that peace, dignity, and opportunity 
become a reality for every person in the world. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 