1  
Statement of the Kingdom of Bahrain  
At the United Nations General Assembly  
80th Session – 26 September 2025  
United Nations Headquarters – New York  
 
In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,  
Your Excellency Annalena Baerbock, President of the United Nations General Assembly,  
Your Excellency the Secretary -General of the United Nations,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, distinguished delegates,  
May the peace, mercy, and blessings of God be upon you,  
It gives me great pleasure to congratulate You , Excellency , on your election as President of t his 
session of the General Assembly, wishing you every success in managing its work. I would like to  
thank His Excellency the Secretary -General, Mr. António Guterres, for his tireless efforts to 
strengthen the role of the United Nations in addressing contemporary international issues . 
Madam President,  
This 80th Session of the General Assembly is convened with the world fac ing accelerating 
transformations and complex challenges, including geopolitical tensions, armed conflicts, climate 
change, and major political and economic crises, all of which have grave humanitarian 
repercussions. This situation requires collective effort t o strengthen international solidarity, to 
entrench dialogue and understanding, and to uphold international law, for a brighter future for 
humanity.  
In this context, the Kingdom of Bahrain, under the leadership of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa 
Al Khalifa, and with the support of His Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, 
Crown Prince and Prime Minister, reaffirms its commitment to strength ening multilateral 
cooperation, upholding international law and the principles of the United Nations  Charter, and 
deepening its strategic partnership with the United Nations and its agencies , in order to fulfill our 
shared aspirations for peace, security, and sustainable prosperity . 
The work of this session coincides with my country’s election as a non -permanent member of the 
UN Security Council for the coming two years , with 99.5% of votes in the General Assembly – a 

2 precious expression of international confidence that we highly value , and we thank all countries 
on their support and confidence . My country also looks forward to hosting the forth coming GCC 
Summit this December, thereby reinforcing its role as a key partner in advancing regional and 
international peace, security, and coexistence, within stable, sustainable, and prosperous societies.  
From this standpoint, the Kingdom of Bahrain  sets forth its vision , under the leadership of His 
Majesty the King, for regional and global peace, coexistence, and prosperity. This vision is deeply -
rooted in our historical and civilizational heritage, our human values, and our balanced diplomatic 
approach, and is aligned with the principles of the UN Charter and international law. We firmly 
believe in peace, and that any conflict  can only find a lasting solution through direct negotiations, 
political will, and a spirit of compromise. For this reason, we welcome all sincere initiatives for 
mediation and dialogue, in the conviction that diplomacy  is the only path to end the cycles of death 
and destructi on and to shape a future that future generations can inherit with dignity and hope.  
The Kingdom of Bahrain seeks to advance this vision through the following main pillars:  
Firstly,  a commitment to  peaceful solutions to conflicts, especially in the Middle East. The 
Kingdom  of Bahrain  calls for a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, the 
protection of civilians, the release of hostages and detainees, expediting the  sustained delivery of 
humanitarian aid, the implementation of the Arab and Islamic plan for recovery and reconstruction  
in the strip , and the firm rejection of any forced displacement schemes, settlement expansion, or 
attempts to alter the historical and religious status qu o of Jerusalem, a city that has embraced divine 
faiths throughout history.  
My country warns of the repercussions of the war in Gaza on regional stability and global interests, 
and condemn ed the Israeli attack on the State of Qatar, which has long played a recognized role in 
mediation, together with the Arab Republic of Egypt and the United States of America, to achieve 
a lasting ceasefire in Gaza and secure the release of hostages and detain ees. 
Accordingly, my country calls for negotiations and diplomatic solutions as the path to resolving 
the Palestinian issue in line with international law and the UN Charter, and urges the international 
community to respond to the initiative of His Majesty the King – endorsed by the 33rd Arab 
Summit, the “Bahrain Summit” – calling for an international peace conference in the Middle East, 
leading to a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the Palestinian -Israeli conflict  through 
direct negotiations .  
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the decision of the General Assembly  to endorse the “New 
York Declaration” on the peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question and the implementation 
of the two -state solution, and we commend  the growing international recognition of the State of 
Palestine, and the efforts undertaken by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the French Republic in 
this regard.  
Bahrain further emphasizes the need for peaceful solutions to the crises in Syria, Lebanon, Sudan, 
Libya, Yemen, Somalia, and beyond, in a manner that guarantees their sovereignty, unity, and 
territorial integrity, and secures their peoples’ rights to stab ility and sustainable development. This 
3 approach is based on the principles of good neighbo urliness, non -interference in internal affairs, 
and the rejection of the use or threat of force.  
The Kingdom also affirms the importance of joint action to rid the Middle East of weapons of 
mass destruction, spare it the risks of an arms race  and military escalation, and calls for the 
resumption of US -Iranian negotiations t o resolve the Iranian nuclear file, in a manner that promotes 
global peace and security.  
The second pillar  is the promot ion of  a culture of peace, tolerance, coexistence, and dialogue 
between religions and cultures, in line with the principles of the “Kingdom of Bahrain Declaration ” 
on freedom of religion and belief, and calls for an international convention to combat hate speech, 
racism, and the misuse of digital platforms to incite extremism , radicalism and terrorism.  
The third pillar of the Kingdom of Bahrain’s vision relates to s trengthening international strategic 
partnerships for security, peace, and prosperity. In this regard, we  take pride in the Comprehensive 
Security Integration and Prosperity Agreement (C -SIPA) signed with the United States of 
America, and the United Kingdom,  which  His Royal Highness the Crown Prince and Prime 
Minister described as “a launching point for a multilateral framework that brings together like -
minded states to achieve stability and pr osperity, and an effective model of a comprehensive vision 
based on mutual respect and common goals.”  
My country seeks to enhance partnerships with  states,  organisations and regional  and international 
groupings  in order  to combat terrorism, strengthen cybersecurity, and ensure  food and water 
security,  promote digital innovation, and artificial intelligence , with the aim  of providing a safe, 
stable , prosperous and sustainable environ ment . 
The fourth pillar reaffirms my country’s commitment to strengthening international cooperation 
for sustainable development and humanitarian solidarity, including tackling poverty  around the 
world. T he Royal Humanitarian Foundation  undertakes the implement ation of  numerous health, 
education, and relief projects worldwide. The Kingdom is also pursuing the implementation of its 
initiative, endorsed by the “Bahrain Summit ”, to provide health and education assistance to those 
affected by conflicts in the region, in support of the Sustainable Development Goals , and to ensure 
that no one is left behind.  
The Kingdom of Bahrain, proud of its fruitful cooperation with the United Nations, reaffirms its 
commitment to sharing its experience as a leading model of reform  and constant  development , 
legislative modernization, and a homeland of tolerance, coexistence, religious freedom  and 
humanitarian work . 
We are proud that reform and development have not been mere  slogans, but have become a reality 
experienced by the Bahraini citizen . Our youth are leading digital innovation, our women are 
assuming leadership positions, and our society presents a model of coexistence and pluralism. Our 
Government’s goal has  always  been to ensure for our citizens a dignified life in housing, work, 
education, and health, believing that human dignity is the foundation of national prosperity. This 
same spirit, we believe, should  be the starting point for building a more cooperative and stable 
region.  
4 We have strengthened the rule of law and constitutional institutions, and made notable progress 
across  all areas of human rights , and we take pride in our pioneering initiatives such as  alternative 
sentencing measures, open prisons, a special court for children, supportive program mes for 
women, families, and children, and an advanced legislative system . Our economy continues to 
diversify away from oil, with a growing contribution from non -oil sectors and increasing foreign 
investment reflecting  growing  international confidence. In the digital sphere, Bahrain ranks among 
global leaders in innovation, digital transformation, and cybersecurity , and in his ad dress before 
the General Assembly last year, His Royal Highness the Crown Prince and Prime Minister called 
for the adoption of an international convention to regulate and govern the development of artificial 
intelligence . 
My country takes pride in the abilities and competence of its youth, having adopted numerous 
pioneering initiatives to empower them, such as the King Hamad Award for Youth Empowerment 
in partnership with the United Nations, and the launch of the Global Youth Competitiveness 
support network, ‘The Hope Network’ . Likewise, we support the advancement of women through 
the launch of the HRH Princess Sabeeka bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa Global Award for Women’s 
Empowerment, now in its third  edition, in addition to our membership in the Executive Board of 
UN Women for the coming three years.  
In the environmental field, we reaffirm our commitment to achieving net -zero carbon neutrality 
by 2060, through investment in clean energy and green technologies.  
Madam President,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
What Bahrain is building domestically in terms of reform and sustainability is an extension of our 
broader global vision: building a more just, tolerant, and sustainable society at home is a direct 
contribution to creating a more stable  and secure  Middle East, and a more cooperative and 
equitable world.  
From here, the Kingdom of Bahrain renews its commitment to the United Nations Charter and to 
strengthening cooperation with the Organization through the Strategic Partnership Framework for 
Sustainable Development . signed with more than 21 UN agencies. As His Majesty the King 
underlined in his message on the 80th anniversary of the United Nations, Bahrain takes pride in its 
membership , and is determined to achieve shared humanitarian and development goals, and to 
strengthen  strategic partnerships for a futur e of peace, justice, and prosperity for all peoples.  
From this standpoint, my country  calls for  the reform of the United Nations system, to enhance its 
effectiveness, transparency, and  to ensure the representation of developing countries in decision -
making.  During its upcoming  non-permanent member ship of the Security Council, my country is 
committed to promoting  dialogue, building bridges of peace, consolidating tolerance and 
coexistence,  supporting the protection and promotion of human rights, advancing sustainable 
development, and enhancing the Council’s efficiency in  address ing global challenges.  
5 The decisions we take in this session do not only shape our present, but will determine the fate of 
generations yet unborn. Will they inherit a world torn  apart by conflict and division ? Or a 
homeland of peace, prosperity, and human cooperation? Let us work together to realise the essence 
of this session’s theme, “Better Together” and rise to the human values enshrined in the UN 
Charter . Let us make this 80th Session of the General Assembly a turning point toward a more just 
and humane international order, with peace that upholds  dignity  and fulfils the aspirations of our 
peoples , and prosperity that secures our shared  future . 
The coming generations deserve a world that embraces their dreams, unrestrained  by fear and 
unburdened  by conflict. We pray to Almighty God to guide us all to outcomes which bring 
goodness and progress  for all humanity, in a world that is safer, more just, more sustainable, and 
more prosperous.  
Thank you. Peace be upon you.  
 