1 S.E. The President of the Republic, Gabriel Boric Font, speaks at the General Debate of the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly SEPT 23. 2025 Source: https://prensa.presidencia.cl/discurso.aspx?id=304016 2 Dear President, members of the United Nations General Assembly, inhabitants and peoples of the world: Eighty years have passed since the creation of the United Nations. Eighty years have also passed since Gabriela Mistral, a Chilean woman raised among the hills of the Elqui Valley, received the Nobel Prize for Literature. Her voice — as a poet, as a teacher, as a diplomat — continues to resonate in our country and in the world. And it was precisely here in New York, in 1955, that the Chilean ambassador José Maza read the Message on Human Rights, written by Gabriela Mistral; which said: "I would be happy if your noble effort to obtain human rights were adopted with all loyalty by all the nations of the world. This triumph will be the greatest among those achieved in our time." Have we achieved this triumph? The answer is categorical. No. And the thing is, at this point, I no longer know what to say about Gaza, because many have said it all, from this platform and from others. But above our words, from whoever they come, the dead looks of those who, being innocent, have lost their lives resonate. Today, being 2025, there are thousands of innocent human beings who lose their lives just for being Palestinians, just as 80 years ago millions lost their lives just for being Jews. So, rather than talking about figures, sentences or demands that resonate within these walls, today I would like to talk about humanity. Gaza is a global crisis because it is a crisis of humanity. And in this room, and those who listen to us in their homes, in their delegations, in their various countries, we are, precisely, all human beings. Therefore, when boys and girls lie under the rubble, there is genuine pain in our homeland, in Chile; and I know that it is shared in the vast majority of countries in the world. And one of the problems we face as humanity is that pain often breeds hatred. But we must face it and fight hate with all our strength. Transform the desire to hate into a desire for justice, do not make any concessions to violence. I do not want to see Netanyahu destroyed by a missile along with his family, I want to see Netanyahu and those responsible for the genocide against the Palestinian people facing an international court of justice. In another context, the war in Ukraine also violates us. But, some may ask, what does what happens in a country that is so far away and whose language we do not understand have to do with Chile? Some criticize us with these arguments in our country. We respond that we have the same thing to do with the Palestinian mother who was shot while looking for food. Or with the Ukrainian boy or girl kidnapped today in Russia. Again it has to do with the fact that we are all human beings. One of the reasons we gather here, perhaps the main one, is that we continue to have faith in humanity. Our hearts cannot, we cannot allow them to stop being moved by the pain, by the need of others like us. For this reason, we have precisely given ourselves rules, rules that are civilizational advances as a result of learning from the greatest tragedies that we have faced as humanity. And those rules, it must be said, from this platform and acting from this instance, are not being respected today. Because let's say it forcefully: it is not right to invite a neutral country to negotiate and assassinate your counterpart, violating the sovereignty of that country as was done in Doha, Qatar. It is not right to bomb a country's nuclear facilities just as yesterday it was not right to invade Iraq claiming weapons of mass destruction that did not exist. It is not right to invade a sovereign country like Ukraine and then impose a negotiation on fait accompli and that we all simply resign ourselves to it. As the French writer Albert Camus reminded us regarding the experience of the Second World War, if we believe in nothing, if nothing makes sense and we cannot invoke any value, then everything is permitted, there is no good or evil, and nothing matters. So, if we accepted that, we would have to admit that reason is only on the side of those who are successful and the rule with which we evaluate humanity would only be effectiveness, that is, the law of the strongest. I want to tell you that, ultimately, this reasoning is the justification for murder. In such a world, the life of a man, a woman or their children will always depend on chance or arbitrary benevolence (or maleficence). In a world like this, all those who live without condemning it with all their might are, in a way, as murderous as the one who drops the bomb or the one who pulls the trigger. Especially, having the voice and the power to say enough is enough, as all the leaders in this room do: we have a greater responsibility. 4 We refuse to agree with those who have strength or money, and when we affirm this we are branded as utopians. But what is history if not a permanent utopian journey? There will be those who prefer to only undertake tasks that work in the short term, but in general, shortcuts lead to cliffs. And it is not necessary to be successful in the sense in which success is understood today, at least in the Western world, to continue fighting for a more just world. Because we know that it is precisely this struggle, which we share, that has allowed us to change the world so that there is more justice, more freedom, more equality, more inclusion, more solidarity. Therefore, dear men and women, when we are invited to submit, when it is stated that intelligence is unnecessary, when they want to show us, as some have done from this podium, that we can lie to gain an advantage, let us say no. Let us not give in to cunning, violence, or passivity. I can and should respect those who like the color blue more than red, those who profess a faith different from mine, those who believe that it is better to increase or decrease taxes depending on the circumstances. Deep down, I can and must respect the diversity of opinions. But while I respect the diversity of opinion of those who think differently, I face the insolence of those who lie, even more so when that person is aware of it. For example, it has been stated, on this same podium, today, that there is no such thing as global warming. That is not an opinion, it is a lie, and we must fight lies. We can certainly argue about what are the best ways to confront global warming, or who is more responsible than others, but we cannot deny it. We can discuss how the Nazis came to rule a significant part of Europe, but we cannot deny the Holocaust. We can study the side effects of a vaccine, but we cannot say without evidence that vaccines cause autism. The world needs a true dialogue. Dialogue between different people, between those who have different visions of the world. That is precisely why these United Nations were created. To dialogue and decide that barbarism is not acceptable. That human rights must be respected regardless of the ideologies of victims or perpetrators. That international law is the guarantee that reason will always prevail over force. The opposite of this dialogue is lies and silence. And both take us to the deepest loneliness. So what is our task today? Trace and walk towards the future that we want as 5 humanity and work for a United Nations that takes us on that path. From Chile we are mobilized by this shared vision regarding democracy, human rights, social justice, equity, unrestricted respect for freedom of expression, climate action, all of these that stand as pillars of hope and action to navigate the difficult times we face. Today the world needs strong and clear voices that defend the commitment to Democracy, always!, without nuances, without excuses. For this reason, this week we have convened, together with Brazil, Spain, Uruguay and Colombia, the second Meeting for the Defense of Democracy, a collective effort that started right here at the UN, a year ago. We want to build bridges to identify the shortcomings of democracy, look for ways to correct them and improve the quality of life of our people. We are not content with pointing out what we do not like about the world, we are not content with saying “this does not represent us”; We want to positively propose and defend what we do believe. Having said the above, I would like to briefly dwell on a particular topic. I come from Chile, which is a tricontinental country, which has an intimate link with the ocean, we have more than 7,600 kilometers of coastline and as a country that faces the ocean, we are proud to have been the first in America and the second in the world to ratify the BBNJ Agreement to expand ocean governance beyond jurisdictional areas, which also, in recent weeks, complied with the sixty ratiﬁcations for it to come into force, and therefore its first conference of the parties must be held next year, hopefully in the first months. I want here to reiterate our offer for its Secretariat to be established in our “pearl of the Pacific”, our city of Valparaíso, because we believe that this agreement is an opportunity to bring ocean governance closer to the global south. Chile is also a country with an Antarctic vocation, that continent of science and peace, and we have leadership materialized in scientific research, in logistical support, in campaigns on the white continent. Most of you, when you have gone to Antarctica, have done so through Chile. In two weeks, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources will meet again. Therefore, today I make a call to your States Parties: it is time to approve the proposal for a marine protected area of ​​Domain 1 on the Antarctic Peninsula, presented jointly by Chile and Argentina. 6 We cannot dedicate ourselves to exploiting resources if we do not adopt appropriate conservation measures, as this results in the destruction of the marine life on which we also depend. Let's not forget that we are part of the same ecosystem. Sustaining life on earth is a task that we must assume urgently and with responsibility: for those who came before us, for those who today share life with us in the world and for the generations to come. Dear men and women: in this scenario of tensions, prolonged conflicts, climate crisis and humanitarian crises, the selection and nomination process of whoever will be Secretary General of the United Nations takes on special relevance. I come to this Assembly convinced that always, even in the most adverse conditions and circumstances, there is room to act in a lucid, collective, transformative, humanitarian way. That human tragedy is never inevitable. We will not give up hope that the changes in the world and that the United Nations requires can happen. Because it depends precisely on us. I want to tell you that regional balance must be respected in this process. This is the time of Latin America and the Caribbean: we are a region without wars, with a rich diplomatic tradition, forging consensus, and an unwavering commitment to the United Nations Charter since its founding. Addressing the historical gender imbalance in the United Nations, where no Secretary General has ever been a woman, is also a pending issue. Eighty years of history without a woman having been the Secretary General of the United Nations. The UN must reflect the advances in the world and recognize that a woman in charge is not only a symbol of equity, but also represents and makes a reality that women, being half of the population, are more than half of the population; It can occupy all the spaces in the world, and no space is closed to it. Chile wants to actively contribute to this collective effort and therefore, it is a tremendous honor for me to announce from here that Chile will nominate our former President Michelle Bachelet Jeria as a candidate for the Secretary General of the United Nations, who is also accompanying us in this session. Michelle Bachelet is not only a widely known and respected figure on a global level. She is a woman with a biography deeply consistent with the values ​​that inspire this organization. She has been head of state of Chile on two occasions, by the way, the 7th first woman. She was also Minister of Health and Defense, she was executive director of UN Women and also United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Michelle Bachelet has governed, she has negotiated, she has healed and she has listened. His life path combines empathy with firmness, experience with openness and all of them with the executive capacity to decide, to do. In times of fragmentation and mistrust, I have the conviction and I know that this is shared in my country, that Michelle Bachelet represents a figure capable of building bridges between the north and the south, between the east and the west, between the urgency of solutions and the defense of principles. With his leadership, the United Nations will be able to regain credibility, effectiveness and purpose in the face of the challenges of our time, certainly working on the legacy of António Guterres, who I know has given his best for the dignity of humanity throughout this institution. With humility and conviction, from Chile we present this candidacy with the certainty that Michelle Bachelet can contribute decisively to making the United Nations, once again, a space of encounter, solutions and active hope for the entire world. Dear men and women: it is eighty years. We look back at these decades and appreciate the enormous advances that international governance has made. Despite the disasters we face, we can also say that we have made progress, but we are also gripped by the feeling that these advances are in danger. Who will be the ones who draw the maps of the world of the future? We want to believe that they will not be those who attack, those who disbelieve and weaken multilateral institutions, those who humiliate the weakest. We want to believe that they will be all the peoples of the earth together. That together, represented in this Assembly, we will be able to outline the definitive paths so that we have a future that is not only possible and viable, but also dignified and respectful of all people. And to achieve this, this organization, which emerged, remember, from the ashes of the Second World War, after the failure of the League of Nations, this organization is fundamental; and its renewal, its changes, are fundamental and urgent. Therefore, renewed and reformulated, but with the same purpose: that, in its plurality, the international community works together, in the words of Víctor Jara, that tremendous Chilean singer, Chilean artist: “for that love of the land that has helped us live, love of peace to enjoy life, love of freedom for all, so that my daughters, and my home, and the neighborhood, the city and the towns exist, without own yokes nor foreign yokes.” Let us travel, dear men and women, together, free and equal, diverse and similar, on the shared path of seeking truth, beauty, happiness and justice. Thank you so much.