            
 
 
Speech of His Excellency the Prime Minister  
Mr. José Ulisses Correia e Silva,  
in the General Debate of the 80th Session of the United 
Nations General Assembly  
 
- Nova Iorque, 2 6 de September  de 202 5 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Madam President of the 80th Session of the General Assembly,  
Mr. Secretary -General of the United Nations,  
Excellencies  
It is with great honor  that I take the floor in this G eneral  Assembly, on behalf of the 
people and the Government of Ca bo Verde, in this session in which we celebrate the 
80th anniversary of the United Nations.  
The 80th anniversary of our organization  comes in turbulent times marked by:  
1. Devastating wars and  armed conflicts;  
2. Humanitarian crises of enormous magnitude;  
3. Expansion of populism and extremism ; 
4. A structured anti -system  that fights to impose a system that eliminates the 
boundary between democracy and autocracy, as well as, between truth and lies.  
This turbulent world helplessly watches the acceleration of climate change, threatening 
Planet Earth and Humanity.  
No country is immune to this disruptive movement  that advances with the impulse to 
exercise absolute power, the provocation and exploitation of social fractures and the 
ideology of post -truth.  
This turbulent world requires a United Nations  empowered as a global regulator  and 
that is  only effective when resulting  from the political will of its Member States . 
In this context, I would like to praise the UN80 Initiative, launched by Secretary -
General António Guterres , as a space for reflection and renewal of multilateralism; and 
to mobilize  political will for peace, sustainable development and human rights.  
---***--- 
Cabo Verde welcomes the revitalization of the Commission on the Status of Women,  
a central instrument for the promotion of gender equality in the multilateral system.  
We believe that the acceleration of the Sustainable Development Goals depends on 
the empowerment of women. We will continue to be staunch advocates for this cause, 
both inside and outside the United Nations.  
 
We advocate the urgent and necessary reform of the Security Council , in line with 
Africa's position.  
The Summit of the Future offers a unique opportunity to strengthen commitment to 
the SDGs. More than global goals, it is the human dignity of millions of people that is at 
stake. Real  people, children of God, living in real countries.  
Acting in multiple dimensions, we recognize the importance and relevance of the 
Global Compact for Digitalization for equitable access to digital technologies and 
artificial intelligence.  
---***--- 
Excellencies , 
Cabo Verde is an active  and dynamic SIDS committed to the multilateral agenda . We 
currently hold the vice presidency of AOSIS.  
We actively participated in the 3rd Ocean Conference .  We were chosen to co -facilitate, 
along with Australia, the negotiations that led to the Nice Declaration "Our Ocean, our 
future, our responsabilities",  containing firm commitments to the sustainability of the 
oceans.  
We welcome the AOSIS Leaders' Declaration, the adoption of which demonstrates a 
strong commitment to issues related to the Ocean, Climate and Sustainable 
Development.  
We applaud the successful 4th Conference on Financing for Development . The Seville 
Commitment is a unique opportunity to boost development, especially in the most 
vulnerable countries, such as SIDS.  
For us , SIDS, it is essential to operationalize the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index,  
the mechanisms for converting debt into climate finance and the Loss and Damage Fund.  
The Antigua and Barbuda Plan of Action stands.  Its implementation into  resilient 
prosperity is SIDS’ greatest ambition.  
We note with satisfaction a historic achievement: the entry into force of the 
Agreement on Marine Biodiversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction. Cabo Verde 
is among the first 60 states to ratify this important treaty.  
I would also like to highlight, with particular satisfaction, the entry into force of the 
historic Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies . Cabo Verde is proud to have participated in 
this process and we firmly believe that this Agreement is a decisive tool in the fight 
against illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing, practices that threaten marine 
biodiversity and the food security of millions of people.  
Unfortunately, it was not possible to reach consensus for the adoption of a treaty on 
plastic . We must continue to insist.  
I particularly welcome the Special Meeting on Climate  convened by Secretary -General 
António Guterres and Brazil’s President Lula da Silva, on the sidelines of this General 
Assembly and in preparation for COP30.  
The COP in Belém represents a crucial moment for the full implementation of the Paris 
Agreement  and to ensure that climate ambition translates into just action.  
As SIDS, we demand clear commitments from all States , especially the largest emitters, 
to limit the temperature increase to 1.5ºC.  This is not a mere claim, it is a matter of 
survival for All, All, All.  
---***--- 
Excellencies  
Global peace and security remain threatened, increasingly threatened.  
Cabo Verde's position has been clear, predictable and consistent : 
1. We condemn coups d'état;  
2. We condemn terrorism;  
3. We condemn genocide;  
4. We condemn assaults on the territorial integrity of countries;  
5. We advocate dialogue and diplomacy for the prevention and resolution of 
conflicts.  
We support a just and durable peace for the resolution of the war in Ukraine.  
We support the two -state solution, Israel and Palestine, living side by side, in peace and 
security.  
We advocate a strong commitment to preventing and combating terrorism and conflict 
in Africa.  
We advocate multilateralism and a strong and effective UN, converging with the 
principles of the Chinese Global Governance Initiative.  
We are a democracy based on the rule of law and political freedom, freedom of 
expression and economic freedom, and we want to continue like this . 
We belong to ECOWAS, a space of economic integration and neighbourhood and to the 
CPLP, a space of the Portuguese language and cultural affinities.  
We have a special partnership with the European Union anchored in shared values of 
democracy, freedom and good governance; a region  with which our currency has been 
linked with a  fixed parity to the euro since 1998 and with which we have strong 
economic relations.  
Due to our location between the African Continent, Europe and the Americas, the EU, 
the USA and Brazil are our first -line partners in cooperative maritime security, 
preventing and combating drug trafficking, human trafficking, maritime piracy, illegal 
fishing and cybersecurity.  
It is this democratic, stable Ca bo Verde, open to the world, and guided by trust in the 
relations with our partners, that we want to preserve and develop in this troubled 
geopolitical world.  
---***--- 
Madam President,  
Cabo Verde, has the honor  of assuming one of the vice -presidencies of this General 
Assembly, and reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the Charter, the principles and 
values of the United Nations.  
We will continue to be a constructive voice, an active partner and a country committed 
to being useful to the International Community.  
"Together we are better".  Together we can honor  the 80th anniversary of the UN, and 
face  the future with renewed hope: for more peace, more development and more 
human rights.  
 
Thank you very much.  
  