1 
 STATEMENT BY H .E EXCELLENC Y Mr. BRUNO RODRÍGUEZ 
PARRILLA, MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF CUBA, AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION OF 
THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY.  
New York, September 26, 2025  
 
Madam President of the General Assembly ; 
Mr. Secretary -General ; 
As we deliberate here, 2.2 million human beings in Gaza are doomed 
to starve  due to the acts of genocide, extermination and ethnic 
cleansing of the Zionist regime,  which counts on the  military and 
financial supplies and the impunity guaranteed by the United States 
government.  
On behalf of the government and the people of Cuba, I reiterate the 
strongest possible solidarity with the Palestinian people and their just 
cause in favor of freedom, independence and the end of the Zionist 
occupation.  
If the Security Council is rendered  impotent due to the veto exercised or 
threatened to be exercised by the United States , and is therefore unable 
to adopt effective measures to end such barbarity, this General 
Assembly has the duty and the capacity  to promote concrete measures  
without further delay .  
 
It should at least unequivocally declare  the right of Palestine to be a 
member of the United Nations, within the pre -1967 borders, with East 
Jerusalem as its capital and the right to the return of refugees.  
 
Madam President;  
 
Eleven  million persons, 3 million of them children, die every year  from 
hunger and other related diseases. The climate crisis is destroying 
nations and lives  and devastating communities and economies. A 
handful of countries and persons  accumulate more wealth than the vast 
majority of all other countries combined. Colossal inequalities hinder 
sustainable development.  
 
  
2 
 There has been no effective global response to today's serious   
challenges. There could not be one because the current world order 
reflects a bygone era, when most developing countries did not even 
exist as independent States. Eighty years ago, the UN was founded with 
hardly  51 member States. Today, we are 193. 
 
The most urgent  priority is to create a new international order that 
guarantees peace, the right to development, sovereign equality and the 
participation and representation of developing countries in global political  
decisions that provides for common good and prosperity in harmony with 
nature and ensures the exercise of all human rights by all people s. 
 
Let us  all hope for  a new civilized coexistence, in which solidarity, 
international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of disputes prevail, 
as alternatives to war, the use of force, aggression s and occupation ; as 
opposed to aspirations for unipolar domination and hegemon ism; a n 
order without blockades or unilateral coercive measures, based on 
multilateralism and with full respect for the United Nations Charter and 
International Law. 
 
Even despite  its limitations, the United Nations continue s to be  the most 
representative body of the international community. It is our  duty to 
protect and strengthen its intergovernmental essence . Its democratic 
foundations cannot be dilute d in sweeping agendas  that are  subject to 
the whimsical  priorities and rules imposed by those who provide the 
largest  funding.  
 
It is necessary to highlight the central role of the General Assembly as 
its most democratic and representative body.  
 
The primary goal of the  "UN80" initiative launched by the Secretary -
General  should be to strengthen  the intergovernmental nature of the 
United Nations and its capacity to better address the pressing 
challenges of the se times . 
 
It is imperative to  reject the threatening proposal of a new doctrine called 
"peace through strength," which means  to impose  on all of us  the 
arbitrary will of the US imperialism by resorting to  the use of threats , 
coercion  and aggression .  
 
3 
 It is a doctrine conceived  to satisfy the ambitions of an already declining 
unipolar power and responds also to the interests of large transnational 
corporations, at the expense of the rights of sovereign nations and their 
peoples  and of the values on which this Organization was built.  
 
The threat of war looms large today over the Caribbean Sea , with an 
extraordinary and absolutely unjustified naval and air buildup, with 
landing and assault ships  and nuclear submarines . 
 
The Unit ed States uses the pretext of combating crime and drug 
trafficking, a story  that no one believes . 
 
The attack  and destruction of unregistered or unchartered course 
speed boats ; the extrajudicial murder or execution  of civilians ; the 
interdiction  of fishing vessels or boats and the aggressive actions of the 
United States create a dangerous situation that violates International 
Law and threatens regional peace and security.  
 
We reaffirm our support to the Bolivarian government of Venezuela and 
the Popular and Military  union led by President Nicolás Maduro Moros, 
and our strong rejection of the threats of aggression against this sister 
Latin American and Caribbean nation.  
 
We reject the Monroe Doctrine as well as any attempt of militarization, 
intervention or imperialist domination in Latin America and  the 
Caribbean , declared  as a Zone of Peace in January 2014 in Havana, the 
proclamation of which was signed by the Heads of State and 
Government of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.  
 
The accelerated  arms race involves a competition in the realm of death 
and destruction, with the use of extraordinary financial and material 
resources that could be used for mitigating poverty, promote 
development and cooperation . 
 
Meanwhile, most of the meager goals of the 2030 Agenda will not be 
met; Official Development Assistance commitments are ignored; and 
funding for combating climate change is declining.  
 
In 1960, before this very Assembly, the historic leader of the Cuban 
Revolution warned, and I quote: "Let the philosophy of dispossession  
disappear, and the philosophy of war will have disappeared."  
4 
  
Madam President;  
 
Climate change is inexorably and rapidly advancing. The first six months 
of this year have been the warmest on record. Last year  had been  
already the year with the highest temperatures.  From this very podium, 
science as well as decades of collective work to protect the planet are 
being put in question. If capitalism’s unsustainable production and 
consumption patterns are not changed , we will exceed the fateful 1.5 
degree  Celsius threshold  before  the year  2030.  
 
The foreign  debt of developing countries , which  has been paid several 
times over, continu es to grow and record  astronomical figures, thus 
becoming a new form of colonization . It is imperative to implement the  
commitments entered into by  the Fourth International Conference on 
Financing for Development , with  additional  resources and a specific 
multilateral mechanism for negotiating the debt.  
 
We suffer the consequences of a powerful cultural domination in which 
digital technology impacts our lives in an increasingly accelerated and 
comprehensive way . A few transnational corporations impose their 
operating systems and control the content s that  we see, read and listen 
to and shape our behavior. We suffer a dictatorship of algorithm s. 
 
We need to establish common standards in the UN as soon as possible 
to unleash the transformative potential of new technologies, particularly 
AI, for the benefit of all, while mitigating risks.   
 
In addition to the challenges Cuba faces, stemming from its condition  as 
a small island developing State, our country is suffering the devastating 
and cumulative impact of the policy of hostility and economic suffocation 
imposed by the United States for more than six decades.  
 
The blockade against Cuba persists and has been tightened to the 
extremes. It is an overwhelming and prolonged economic war aimed at 
depriving Cubans of their livelihoods and sustainability, of their existence 
as a fraternal and joyful people.  
Anyone claiming otherwise would be lying. The very promoters of this 
war boast of its destructive impact and its ability to strike at the living 
standards of an entire people from any corner of the planet.  
 
5 
 This aggression has escalated to unprecedented levels in the last 8 
years and has included increasingly elaborate, surgical and 
extraterritorial actions of persecution and economic pressure against 
third parties. It imposes multiple and extraordinary impediments on 
production, trade and finances as well as the services and policies that 
guarantee social justice and life itself.  
 
Cuba today faces an unprecedented situation of prolonged and daily 
power outages, difficulties in affording food, insufficient availability of 
medicines, depressed public transportation, limitations on community 
services and steep inflation that depresses real incomes.  
 
In 1960, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State , Lester Mallory drafted the 
memorandum of coercion and economic blockade against Cuba that has 
guided the conduct of the US government during all these years. That 
memorandum stated, and I quote: "...every possible means should be 
undertaken promptly to weaken the economic life of Cuba...a line of 
action which...makes the greatest inroads in denying money and 
supplies to Cuba, to decrease monetary and real wages, to bring about 
hunger, desperation   and overthrow of government." End of quote.  
 
The Secretary of State is the reincarnation of that macabre subject.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Cuba is a victim of terrorism. For years and still today, terrorist acts 
against the country have been organized and financed from the United 
States territory. Well-known perpetrators of horrendous acts of 
aggression against the Cuban people , resulting in thousands of deaths, 
maiming and significant material damage , live there peacefully and with 
absolute impunity.  
 
In compliance with its responsibilities against terrorism and in support of 
UN efforts against this scourge, the Cuban government has officially 
shared with the United States government in recent years the names 
and information about  62 individuals and 20 organizations based  in this 
country which  have been responsible for violent and terrorist acts which,  
from the US  territory, continue to participate in actions  of this nature 
against Cuba. No response has been received, and no one knows  
whether the U.S. authorities have taken any action against any of them.  
 
6 
 It is cynical that the United States government labels Cuba a s a State 
sponsor of terrorism  following political and economic coercion purposes.  
This is  a slander that neither this Organization nor any of its Member 
States  share . 
 
Many national institutions, both banking and financial and commercial, in 
almost all the countries represented here , are subject to intimidation by 
this fallacious designation by the United States government. Because of 
this classification, foreign governments and institutions avoid engaging 
with Cuban entities, offering credit, supporting the country’s  commercial 
activity or channeling our transfers.  
 
Added to this is the intimidation against citizens of more than 40 
countries which the US government threatens with reprisals if, by virtue 
of their rights, they decide to visit Cuba.  
 
The United States has unleashed a vicious  campaign of discredit and 
persecution against Cuba ’s medical cooperation, and of harassment and 
coercion against the authorities of the countries that receive it. It is a 
strategy directed by the State Department . 
 
It intends to denigrate that cooperation which has saved millions of lives 
and, in quite a few cases, it has been the only option of large population 
groups to access health services.  
 
This altruistic and fraternal  cooperation is based on absolutely legitimate 
bilateral agreements and complies with this Organization's international 
standards for Cooperation.  
I confirm, once again, that Cuba will honor  its commitments to all 
countries with which it has signed bilateral medical cooperation 
agreements and programs, and will remain  willing to expand them with 
all governments ready  to develop such cooperation based on 
International Law and their national legislation s, in the interest of  the 
well-being of their peoples.  
 
Since 1963, 605  000 doctors and specialists have performed, among 
others, 17 million surgeries and assisted more than 5 million child 
deliveries. Right now, more than 24 000 healthcare professionals are 
currently  providing  their services in 56 countries.  
7 
 The aggression against Cuba is being reinforced by a powerful 
destabilization machine that, from the US territory and financed by that 
country's federal budget, imposes an offensive aimed at disrupting public 
peace, promoting acts of violence, misleading  the population and 
discrediting our country.  
 
This is an unconventional warfare strategy that combines emotional 
manipulation with information poisoning to impose a climate of 
hopelessness and political demobilization.  
 
In the face of such an asymmetrical onslaught, the resolve of our people 
is strengthened. We are aware of the great challenges that we face and 
the need to achieve , with creativity and the participation of all,  economic 
recovery and strengthen social policies.  
 
On July last, President Miguel Díaz -Canel said, and I quote: “We are not 
an accident of history; we are the logic consequence of a history of 
resistance and rebelliousness against abuse and injustice”, end of 
quote.  
 
We will not cease in our efforts to build our dreams of a better and more 
prosperous socialist country for all,  based on the constitutional order 
chosen by our people, which guarantees sovereignty, national and 
cultural identity and reflects the dream of José Martí, summarized in his 
memorable phrase , and I quote : "The cult of Cuban s to the full dignity of 
man and the search for all the justice" , end of quote.  
 
We have designed a realistic economic recovery program, adapted to 
the very peculiar and extraordinary conditions of our country, aware that 
we must overcome the devastating impacts of the economic blockade, 
overcome the deficiencies inherent to the current economic structure 
and “change everything that needs to be changed”.   We avoid deluding 
ourselves, but results are already beginning to be evident  at the 
macroeconomic level, although the people have not yet perceived them  
nor are they  reflected in  the daily life  of Cuban families . 
 
Cuba is a nation of peace. Despite all the harm the United States has 
caused to us, we have always been willing to have a dialogue, without 
pre-conditions, and attempt to achieve a respectful and civilized 
relationship with that country, without subordination or limits to our 
8 
 sovereign prerogatives. Both peoples would benefit from this 
opportunity.  
 
A considerable number of Cubans live in the United States, many of 
whom today feel threatened, since the politicians who have made 
careers and enriched themselves by supposedly representing them, 
particularly in Miami, have betrayed them . By continuously  sowing 
hatred and political manipulation, they are currently support ing, out of 
opportunism, the xenophobic , racist  and repressive measures of 
intimidation and retaliation unjustly applied against them.  
So is the case, particularly, at the State Department.  
No one should forget  that a significant number  of Cubans have been 
coming  to this country for more than 60 years . They were pushed  by the 
conditions caused by the economic blockade and lured  by the privilege s 
granted  by politically motivated laws and practices that encourage, admit 
and protect them , regardless of whether they migrated  legally or not.  
 
Madam President,  
 
We reaffirm our commitment as a BRICS partner country .    
 
We reject the application of unilateral coercive measures seeking to 
subjugate the sovereign will of peoples. We express our support to 
Belarus, Nicaragua, Venezuela, Zimbabwe, the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Iran, Russia, and other nations that are victims of 
these measures.  
 
We ratify  our solidarity with the Government of National Reconciliation 
and Unity of Nicaragua.  
We reiterate our support to the inalienable right of the people of Puerto 
Rico to self -determination and independence . 
The sister nations of the Caribbean deserve fair and differentiated 
treatment, as well as reparations for the horrors of colonialism and 
slavery . 
The international community has a great responsibility to the Haitian 
people. We maintain our modest cooperation in the area of health with 
this brotherly people and  Cuba will join any international effort to support 
9 
 it based on respect for its sovereignty, without impositions or military 
intervention s. 
We support Argentina’s legitimate and sovereign right over the Malvinas, 
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding 
maritime areas  
 
Cuba remains committed to peace in Colombia.  
 
Africa, the cradle of humanity, will always be able to count on Cuba and 
the solidarity of the Cuban people. We support their just claim for 
reparations for the damages caused by colonization.  
 
We reaffirm our solidarity with the Sahrawi people and their right to self -
determination.  
 
We reaffirm the “One China” principle.  
 
We oppose the aggressive military and nuclear doctrines of NATO.  
 
We strongly  believe, without considering it a utopia , that a better world is 
possible. We believe in the duty to fight and work to achieve it.  
 
Allow me to  reiterate the words expressed by  Army General Raúl Castro 
Ruz, from this podium,  in September , 2015:  
 
“The international community will always be able to  count on Cuba's 
sincere voice in the face of injustice, inequality , underdevelopment, 
discrimination and manipulation and for the establishment of a more just 
and equitable international order that is truly focused on  human beings , 
their dignity and well -being.”  
 
Thank you, very much.  
 
 
  