1 STATEMENT BY CHANCELLOR GABRIELA SOMMERFELD IN THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE EIGHTYTH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS New York, September 25, 2025 Madam President: On the eightieth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations, Ecuador honors with respect and renewed commitment its status as the founding State of this Organization. What was born as a hope for peace on the ruins of World War II has become the most ambitious project of international cooperation in history: a system of norms, institutions, principles, purposes and universal values ​​aimed at protecting human dignity, preventing violence and promoting development. 80 years ago, we States chose cooperation over controversy; peace over war. My presence in this Assembly is an opportunity to ratify before the international community that Ecuador will continue to prioritize collaboration between States, since only by working together can we guarantee a future of peace, security and prosperity for our people. For this reason, Ecuador's foreign policy supports multilateralism, the model that makes international cooperation possible to address global challenges and achieve common objectives. Madam President: Multilateralism must evolve to respond to the current demands of the people and confront new threats. 2 Ecuador maintains that the concept of international peace and security must be expanded to include the fight against transnational organized crime, a phenomenon that undermines governability, fuels corruption, perpetuates violence, and erodes prospects for progress. In effect, it causes consequences similar to traditional armed conflicts, economically, politically and socially. We are not talking about local gangs, but rather international logistics networks and chains that move thousands of tons of drugs, exploit illegal mining and traffic weapons, people and even human organs. Given the emergence of numerous acts of violence and narcoterrorism, the government of Ecuador recognized the existence of a non-international armed conflict in January 2024, and designated several of these groups as terrorists. We have deployed enormous efforts and resources to safeguard security and put citizens first. We do this by promoting programs focused on the prevention of youth violence, including the recruitment, use and use of children and adolescents. Concomitantly, we implement public policies to attract investments and employment in order to guarantee sustainable security. I want to insist on the fact that Ecuador - without having looked for it, due to its proximity to the main cocaine producers in the world - is on the front line of the battle against transnational organized crime, and is waging an existential war against narcoterrorism. Milestones in Ecuador's fight against transnational organized crime and narcoterrorism constitute the seizure of 295 tons of illicit drugs in 2024, as well as the decision to turn to friendly countries to obtain their support in various sectors of this confrontation, such as potential joint military operations, with full respect for the constitutional framework. 3 The Ecuadorian Government has called for a national and democratic debate on foreign military bases through a popular consultation to be held next November, offering strategic points that can serve to control and monitor criminal activities, for the benefit of international peace and security. This popular consultation will be accompanied by the call for a Constituent Assembly, which must provide us with a new fundamental charter that contributes to defeating narcoterrorism and leading us inexorably towards the path of prosperity and social peace. Madam President: At the regional level, Ecuador promoted the establishment of the Resolutive Action Plan (PAR), as a strategic response of the Andean Community to illicit drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. At the multilateral level, Ecuador has led initiatives such as the presidency of the Latin American Security and Intelligence Community (CLASI), in which it has promoted the updating of the Operational Action Plans and the organization of the Latin American Security Summit, consolidating strategic alliances with the European Union and AMERIPOL. Let us agree that transnational organized crime and narcoterrorism are global scourges that know no borders, against which no country can act alone. It is crucial, then, to coordinate efforts and establish cooperation agreements with countries and international organizations, which incorporate financial assistance and technological equipment. Madam President: During these eight decades the United Nations has shown that lasting peace can only be built on solid foundations: security, development and human rights. 4 These three pillars—interdependent and indivisible—represent the foundations of the international order and multilateralism, which currently show serious fissures that compromise their stability. Indeed, multilateralism is questioned today, and rightly so, since it has not been able to deal with contemporary conflicts and challenges effectively. Ecuador advocates for a more innovative, inclusive and representative multilateralism, which takes into account the realities of countries, especially in the developing world; that promotes equality between women and men; and, to finally open the space for young people in decision-making. It is essential to reinforce respect for the fundamental principles of International Law contained in the United Nations Charter, which is the basis of this organization and whose strength depends on our adherence to its spirit and letter. Abandoning it would take us back to the time when the only source of rights was force. It is up to us to reform and update it so that it responds to the current challenges at a global level, so that these principles are precisely strengthened. In short, this institution is called to accompany the evolution of the human being and the planet, attentive to changes in technologies and new challenges. Madam President: Human mobility constitutes another of the most complex challenges of our time. Ecuador, a country of origin, transit, destination and refuge for migrants, reaffirms its commitment to safe, orderly and regular migration, convinced that its good management contributes to sustainable development. Ecuador strongly rejects irregular, unsafe and unordered human mobility, since it largely responds to the interests of organized crime groups that can also be transnational. 5 Emerging technologies, particularly artificial intelligence, pose unprecedented opportunities for human progress, but also significant risks for security, equity and human rights. Ecuador considers it essential to move towards multilateral and ethical governance of these tools, which guarantees their inclusive access, avoids new digital divides and ensures that their use is oriented towards the common good. Climate change and biodiversity loss threaten our stability and development. As a megadiverse country, Ecuador advocates for greater environmental financing, technology transfer and international support for the conservation of unique ecosystems such as the Amazon and the Galapagos Islands, treasures of humanity. Financing for development is another of the great challenges. The international financial architecture must respond to the needs of developing countries, particularly those classified as upper middle income. The exclusive use of GDP per capita, limiting and limited, does not reflect our reality or our vulnerabilities. We need more comprehensive indicators that include multidimensional poverty, structural inequality and climate resilience, so that access to concessional resources and international cooperation is not unfairly diminished. Ecuador supports the use of sustainable financial instruments such as green and thematic bonds, and promotes the creation of new financing mechanisms. Madam President, young people of Ecuador and the world: I am proud to represent a young people. 6 Ecuador is a country of more than 18 million inhabitants, in which young people represent around 40% of the population. The Government of Ecuador and President Daniel Noboa are focused on providing them with opportunities that did not exist in the past. Now is the time for the young people. If we give them opportunities we can promote better care for all citizens. It is a positive and multiplying effect. For us, youth embodies the priority of priorities. Today, young people see the New Ecuador as a country of opportunities and progress, and in which there is a firm commitment to banish corruption and impunity, as well as old politics and inconsequential ideological struggles that perpetuate an unsustainable status quo that favors few. The "New Ecuador" advances with stability and responsibility along an ambitious path of productive, social and institutional transformation towards a new chapter in its development model, involving efforts that include the diversification of its energy matrix, which incorporates the diversification of its productive matrix. The current global economic environment, increasingly complex and demanding, marked by market volatility, geopolitical tensions, uncertainty in the supply chain and rapid technological changes, demands rapid and agile adaptation from us. We are promoting a competitive economic environment, generating openness to business and offering attractive conditions for foreign investment. 7 Several factors encourage investment and business in Ecuador: a wide range of natural resources, a strategic location in South America, the economic stability conferred by the US dollar as the national currency and its status as a megadiverse country, and a rich cultural heritage. Our country risk indicator continues its downward trend, standing at 701 points, which is its lowest level in recent years. Our economy grew 3.9% in the first half of the year, with growth of around 5% expected for the second half. As in the field of security, the economy is improving, even with the challenges we are facing. As of July 2025, adequate employment increased to 38.6%. In other words, 282,000 more Ecuadorians enjoy adequate employment compared to 2024, that is, a change of 3.7% compared to July 2024. These achievements are also related to the laws that President Daniel Noboa and his cabinet have prepared and presented to the National Assembly, which seek to protect peace, transparency and the fight against terrorism and crime, as well as generate employment and economic stability, create social programs and opportunities for development. Madam President: The eightieth anniversary of the UN is a turning point. On the occasion of this historic commemoration of the United Nations, I invite you to forge a creative vision comparable to that of 1945, capable of renewing and strengthening this institutionality founded on an ethical model of democracy, adapting to contemporary realities. 8 Global challenges such as transnational organized crime and narcoterrorism, migration and climate change demand more multilateralism, more cooperation and more collective action. Ecuador reaffirms its commitment to the defense of peace and security, human rights and development. Thank you so much.