September 24, 2025 - Only the delivery is authentic Download the .pdf Speech by the President of the Republic to the United Nations General Assembly Madam President of the General Assembly, Mr. Secretary General, Madam Deputy Secretary General, Mr. Deputy Secretary General, Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government, Ladies and Gentlemen Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen Ambassadors and Ambassadors Delegates, I am pleased to address you once again at the opening of this eightieth session of the United Nations General Assembly. Eight decades that we wanted to devote to the service of peace, development and human rights. 80 years which force us to measure the progress we have made and to adapt our steps to the progress of the world. On June 26, 1945, we adopted the Charter of the United Nations after two world wars, while fighting was still raging in Asia, decolonization had barely begun, the Soviet Union was expanding its empire, we were counting the dead by the millions and discovering the horror of the Shoah. Yes, this stage of the world was not over and yet we were building with resolution and determination this desire to preserve future generations from the scourge of war, proclaimed our faith in fundamental human rights and committed ourselves to creating the conditions of justice, to promoting social progress, to practicing tolerance and to living in peace with each other. We weren't dreaming. And by summoning here our past, what we were 80 years ago, I want to tell you this evening “we have the right to dream” because our world today deserves the same determination to act together. There were 51 of us in San Francisco and there are now 193 member states sitting in this assembly. The texts which found our organization clearly lay down the principles of collective action. They express common values, they define robust procedures. However, I know how much frustration there is, fueled by the unequal representation of States on the Security Council, and this is why I strongly support its enlargement, its reform, in particular its enlargement for the African continent. I also know that political, economic and social balances have evolved, that new actors have taken on more responsibilities and that many people are questioning the promise of the United Nations, its reality and its benefits. Let's not lie to ourselves. This eightieth birthday is not a celebration. Armed conflicts are increasing, internal or international, state or provoked by criminal and terrorist action. The belligerents deliberately flout the Geneva conventions, as if horror served revenge or terror served victory. Gaza, Ukraine, Sudan, Haiti, Burma, Democratic Republic of Congo. The list is as long as it is unbearable of the violence suffered by populations in these war territories. Great transformations are also underway for all of us on this planet. Climate change is not under control and the collapse of biodiversity continues. The efforts that most of us are ready to make come up against the cynicism of a few who can make a difference but still refuse to do so. We see the acceleration of technologies which opens up immense horizons, immense opportunities, but also leaves the field open to forces that are all the more dangerous because they are not regulated. We see world trade experiencing tariff wars which are adding to major global imbalances. This alarm does not extinguish hope. Our divisions do not prevent Syria from being freed from dictatorship, Ukraine is holding on and peace is possible in the Great Lakes region. We have also approved ambitious treaties and agreements, that some thought impossible, a treaty on pandemics, a treaty to protect the high seas, another to finance development. It is good that the complexity of the world is not a reason to give up our principles and our ambitions. In some ways we are living a paradoxical moment where we need more than ever to restore the spirit of cooperation that prevailed 80 years ago, and where however we are in the process of dividing ourselves, and where it must be said, the divisions at the top of the world order, the fracturing of the world, is holding us back in our collective capacity to resolve the major conflicts of the moment or to take up the challenges that require us to get along. France is proud to be among the peoples of the United Nations and pays tribute to all those who serve them: soldiers under blue helmets who keep the peace where no one goes anymore, humanitarian workers and health personnel who come to the aid of the most vulnerable, jurists, observers and rapporteurs who bear witness to reality, impose the force of law and prevent arbitrariness. Here I would like to talk about so many of our NGOs, our caregivers, our journalists. Many more who testify that this organization is irreplaceable. This is the reason why those who are the worst critics are also those who want to change the rules of the game, sure that they are in their domination and more interested in sharing the world than in reaching the compromises necessary for the common good. Basically the great risk of the moment we are living in is the risk of seeing the state of affairs prevail. This is the risk of seeing the law of the strongest prevail. It is the risk of seeing the selfishness of a few prevail, it is the risk of seeing a few thinking that they alone can decide the course of the world and of forgetting that there is no international community without a respectful relationship between peers, without cooperation between peers, which alone makes peace possible, which alone makes it possible to meet the challenges of climate change, technological transformation, or the fight against military proliferation. This is why the priority, 80 years later, which must be ours, is to know how to rediscover the lifeblood of this effective multilateralism, of collective efficiency where it must be said, the anti-gambling, some would say elsewhere, makes the effectiveness of our collective organization almost impossible. We must work together to regain this effective multilateralism. And it is vain in this regard to divide the north from the south, to think that there would be a united West facing a global South. Fantasy, story of the moment which would like to oppose block by block to each other. Here in this forum there are only women and men, who do not have the same religions, who think differently, whose civilizations are sometimes different, but who decided one day that building peace, meeting the challenges in particular of inequality or the great transitions of the world presupposed that they forget these differences in order to cooperate together. This is why we must instead consolidate existing rules and institutions that guarantee our collective authority and this effectiveness. Human rights remain the central pillar of the United Nations building and give coherence to all the measures we take. In this period when conflicts are multiplying and spreading, we are also facing massive human rights crises. Our duty to all is therefore to ensure respect for international humanitarian law as we propose to do within the framework of the global initiative that we are carrying out with a few counterparts: South Africa, Brazil, China, Jordan, Kazakhstan and the ICRC. Let us support the International Criminal Court in its fight against impunity. Let us allow the judgments of the International Court of Justice to be put into effect artwork. The authority of law is our best chance against the law of the strongest; the application of principles is the only remedy to the double standards that so many of us have come to denounce from this platform, before this assembly, since we made it the parliament of the world. Peace and security are for all. This is why it is so important that Ukraine stands up to Russia and achieves a peace that deters Russia from further stealing its territory, its children, its wealth and its future. Russian aggression is not Europe's problem but that of all of us here. It poses the eternal question of the authority of law versus the law of the strongest, of freedom versus imperialism. Ukraine did not want war. She wants peace. France also wants peace, Europeans want peace, the United States of America want peace. For this, Ukraine has a fundamental right: to live in security and to no longer fear that Russia will attack it again. This is why France, with the United Kingdom, has built a coalition of the willing bringing together 35 nations to give Ukraine the guarantees essential to its long-term security. We are thus creating the conditions for a solid and just peace that will allow Ukrainians to fulfill their destiny. And what has happened in recent weeks in the airspace of Poland, dear President, of Romania, the provocations seen in Estonia or elsewhere, are also proof that all Europeans are challenged by threats and desires for Russian destabilization which presuppose such unity. Ukraine has often said it: it is ready for a ceasefire and accepts negotiation. It is now up to Russia to prove that it can choose peace while it is today increasing the attacks against civilians in Ukraine and the provocations that I have just mentioned. In the meantime, France will stand firmly alongside Ukraine, with its European partners and all those who understand the importance of defeating Russia to preserve the world order. I welcome the remarks, a few hours ago, by the President of the United States of America, recalling the progressive weakening of the Russian economy, the failures on the ground of Russia, which imagine, in more than 1000 days has barely taken one percent of Ukrainian territory despite so many losses, so many civilian victims. I am pleased to see that the American President believes in Ukraine's capacity, not simply to hold out but to assert its rights with us. It is because it refuses the double standard that France is committed to Ukraine and to peace in the Middle East. Yesterday, we adopted a credible plan to end the war in Gaza and preserve a two-state solution, Israel and Palestine, enable the release of all hostages and save so many lives. We have charted a path towards peace which requires, above all else, that the hostages still held by Hamas be released and that the strikes on Gaza cease. I am pleased that France and Saudi Arabia have convinced a large number of members of this assembly to sign the New York declaration. We are 142 members of this assembly reaching out to build a path to peace, immediate peace, release of hostages, ceasefire, stabilization of Gaza, demilitarization and dismantling of Hamas and reciprocal recognition, and a demilitarized State of Palestine recognizing Israel, and a State of Israel recognizing a State of Palestine, and all the states in the region which do not yet have it done, thus recognizing the State of Israel. Through this recognition, which is also a path to peace, it is also the stability of the entire region that we seek to build. There cannot be security, stability for Israel if it is a permanent war with all the neighbors which is conducted. Peace with Palestine in the West Bank and Gaza and across Jerusalem. Peace in Lebanon, where the fight against terrorism cannot be done to the detriment of the sovereignty of the Lebanese. And this is why I welcome the work that we have carried out, hand in hand with the United States of America, with the United Nations and UNIFIL, to build this path which makes it possible to restore the sovereignty of Lebanon, put the Lebanese armed forces back in position with the support of UNIFIL, to regain this sovereignty point by point, and obviously to build this monopoly of arms which only can be held by the Lebanese armed forces. Lebanon breathes easier when Hezbollah is less strong, Lebanon will breathe even easier when all the weapons caches, when all the weapons held by Hezbollah are taken back into the hands of the Lebanese armed forces. There is no other choice. As such, France will soon convene a conference in support of the reconstruction of Lebanon, and we will also support the conference that our Saudi friends will hold in support of the Lebanese armed forces. In the same way, Syria must regain its unity and sovereignty. Syria is freer since the Assad regime fell. I received the president of the transition in Paris, I will see him again tomorrow, and with several states in the region, we are working so that Syria can respect all the components of its civil society, which are its strength, its lifeblood, and at the same time can, by rediscovering this unity, regain full control, too, of its sovereignty. And then, the region can only be at peace if the Iranian nuclear program, which has been partially destroyed, is fully controlled again. This is why France, Germany and the United Kingdom have jointly initiated the process leading to the reestablishment of all international sanctions previously taken against Iran. The latter bears sole responsibility for failing to fulfill its obligations, but can still decide to open the doors to the IAEA, to shed light on its stock of enriched uranium, and to accept new negotiations. The next few hours will be decisive. Either Iran makes a gesture, recommits itself to a path of peace and responsibility, allowing this path to be found again, and the IAEA to do its work, and the stockpile to be thus transferred. Either sanctions will have to apply. I will have the opportunity to discuss this tomorrow with President Pezechkian. On each of these crucial questions, France is putting forward concrete solutions. The plan to end the war in Ukraine exists. The plan to make peace in the Middle East exists. The plan to bring Iran's nuclear program back under control exists. The plan to regain full sovereignty of Lebanon in the South exists. Each time, we want to be the partner of all those who share this requirement to act effectively. Yet there is also a risk that we become tired of acting and look away from too much distress. The ongoing humanitarian tragedy in Sudan is undoubtedly the most serious of all today. It is up to us collectively to mobilize, as we did in Paris in 2024. Let us coordinate our efforts to act together, so that the belligerents accept negotiation and hand over power to civilians. Likewise, in the Great Lakes region, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of Congo must be respected. We must restore hope to the population of Kivu and the hundreds of thousands of people who have been displaced. This is also why we will bring together next month in Paris all those who can respond to the humanitarian emergency and bring together peace initiatives. I welcome what has been done by the African Union, by so many neighbors, by Qatar, by the United States of America. But the humanitarian emergency, here too, is essential. We must not forget any of these conflicts. We have no right to be discouraged at any time. This capacity for surprise is our strength, it’s what brought us together eight decades ago. We have no right to be tired in this moment that we are experiencing. Having gone through, without being complete, so many crises, I look with you lucidly at the world in which we live. We see proliferation risks returning everywhere and new threats without a collective framework re-emerging. The urgency is also to rebuild a credible, verifiable framework to combat all nuclear proliferation, to rebuild a credible framework to re-contain ballistic threats and proliferations. I have not forgotten the chemical and bacteriological threats, and I have not forgotten the new risks, those involving artificial intelligence, quantum, cyber or space. So many threats on which our existing common frameworks have been weakened in recent years. Sometimes because some have made them obsolete, other times because the verification rules have not been duly observed, also because technological acceleration means that it and its innovation capabilities go faster than our existing frameworks. On all these points, we have no right to give in. Our responsibility is to move forward and build this essential framework of peace. It is the same demand for efficiency, this same effective multilateralism that we must have on the major global challenges that face us. I know the attention that the Secretary General pays to this and I want to thank him for the ambition he displays for our organization through the UN 80 initiative. I share this concern. Yes, in this moment of disorder that I mentioned regarding the major questions of peace and war, we must not forget that we have so many global challenges which require the same spirit of cooperation. Let us face our major global imbalances. They affect all economies, certainly the richest, and I speak on behalf of one of them. But even more middle-income countries, developing countries and obviously the poorest. If we fail to have an organized international conversation about the planet's great imbalances, if we respond to them in a dispersed and uncooperative manner, we will make them worse. Today, our challenge is to see how to help China develop the domestic demand it so badly needs. How can we try to ensure that the remarkable production capacities that it has been able to develop in recent years, these technological capacities, are sometimes the subject of technology transfers, but also are accompanied by a harmonious development of its internal market? How can we deal with American trade imbalances today in a cooperative manner and not through tariffs that will fracture our international trade? And how can we ensure that we have a Europe that can meet the collective investment needs that we have today? These challenges assume that we must have cooperation between major economies but that we do not also oppose the G7 with the BRICS and this is the entire agenda that we are setting for the French G7 of 2026, obviously linked to today's Canadian presidency of the G7 and the successive presidencies of the G20. We need to rediscover this spirit of cooperation which is essential because it is what will also allow us to have a common agenda, to finance the global challenges that are ours. Let's look at ourselves today. We are everywhere in the process of reducing our common ambitions to finance the world's great challenges. Reduced collective funding for health, reduced collective funding for food security, reduced funding collectives for education. Yet these challenges are ours, as much and even more so than they were before the COVID-19 pandemic. So it is absolutely essential that collectively we know how to build concrete solutions and new funding to do so. The Europeans have decided to mobilize and I thank the President of the Commission who made a strong speech on the matter and mobilized the financing instruments that we Europeans have put together to respond to these major challenges. But we must also do it in a renovated framework. The one that we tried to build together during the pandemic itself, with our African partners during the financing summit that we had built together in 2021. The one together that we continued during the 4 P summit where we built this pact for the prosperity of people and the planet. Basically, with the same agenda. Together we must cooperate better in the face of global economic imbalances. We must build an agenda for growth everywhere. But we must do it to also help countries finance education, health, stabilization and food security efforts and to meet the challenges of biodiversity and climate. Let's get out of this dilemma where we would have to choose between growth and climate and biodiversity. We can do this if we know how to mobilize this public and private funding in a framework that brings together the East, the West, the South and the North. This is the framework that we have built. It means now accelerating the transition which has begun to be led, and I want to thank them, by the leaders of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. But we need to go further. These frameworks have further become obsolete. We need to mobilize more private financing to support these transitions. In middle-income countries, in developing countries, in the poorest countries. We need to build guarantee mechanisms to cover the first losses. We need to mobilize more private financing to come to these countries and help them grow. This is essential if we want to avoid the crises and destabilizations of tomorrow. This agenda is an agenda that brings us together and that somehow takes some out of their selfishness and prevents some others from having to sort of face the challenges that are theirs alone. This is also why we must continue, whatever the bad winds that blow, to mobilize in the face of the challenges of biodiversity and the climate. As I said, we have been able to build victories together in recent months. The Treaty of Nice, which was able to come into force through collective mobilization, will finally provide a regulatory framework for our oceans. This has been expected for decades. It is the same collective mobilization that we must have on plastic. Build an international treaty aimed at putting an end to plastic pollution. This is the same mobilization that we must have to deploy biodiversity credits much more effectively and restore more substance to our carbon credits. This is the same mobilization that we need to have in view of the Belém COP. I say it here, Europe and France will be there. They will meet the 2035 objectives assigned to us. They will also be there to mobilize all the funding to lead this transition, whether public or private. We do not have the right, here too, to turn away from the objectives that we have assigned to ourselves. We do not have the right, as it were, to withdraw. As you have understood, all these global challenges, education, health, agriculture, food security, biodiversity, climate, the fight head-on against all the inequalities which destabilize our world order, presuppose the same spirit of cooperation that I mentioned in the face of wars or destabilization. The challenge facing us is that the crises are multiple, accumulating, and that my speech, which is already too long, is nevertheless very incomplete. But I assure you, I will stop it there. But I will tell you this very forcefully. Despite all this, the long list, which sometimes gives the feeling that we could be overwhelmed, our duty is to remain standing and continue to act together. 80 years ago those who preceded us were facing collapse, the war was not over, the worst had just happened, an already divided world was coming together and they decided to build this treasure that is the United Nations. We could overwhelm our Assembly with lots of reproaches, including reproaches which are not entirely fair. This Assembly is us. If it is ineffective, it is because some people are blocking it. And often the most powerful. If it is not going fast enough, it is because we are not determined enough to move it forward. The United Nations is all of us. There is one thing: we have no right to cynicism. We do not have the right to be tired. We do not have the right to the spirit of defeat. Because our world is there, in front of us. The risk that runs is that of fragmentation, of the law of the strongest, of the state of affairs, of cynicism, and in some way, of loss of control. Yes, that’s what loss of control is. This is what our people are experiencing everywhere. Fear of a future that they no longer control. Fear of the migrations suffered by some. Fear in the face of a climate that we can no longer control. Fear in the face of inequalities that we can no longer stabilize. Fear in the face of a war that we cannot stop. This fear has only one friend. The strongest who created the conditions. The cynic who thinks we can get by in the shelter of a few who succeed. We only have one responsibility. Act together. Building this effective multilateralism again. With the same faith, the same determination as the founding fathers of this assembly. Do it with even more efficiency, but with the same desire. Don't give in to injustice. Don't give in to fate. Act. Act. Act. So it’s up to us to do. Together. Thank you.