1 GABONESE REPUBLIC Union - Labor - Justice SPEECH BY H.E.M. BRICE CLOTAIRE OLIGUI NGUEMA PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, HEAD OF STATE, HEAD OF GOVERNMENT. General debate of the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly. ----------- New York, September 25, 2025 2 Madam President of the General Assembly; Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government; Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations; Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen. At the start of my remarks, I am pleased to extend my most sincere and warm congratulations to Her Excellency Mrs. ANNALENA BAERBOCK for her election to the Presidency of this 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly. Madam President, Your experience will enable you, I am convinced, to effectively accomplish the missions inherent to your high office. Please be assured of my country’s full cooperation. To His Excellency Mr. Philémon YANG, your predecessor, I extend my 3 compliments for the remarkable work accomplished during his mandate. Finally, I would like to once again salute the action of His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of our Organization, for all the efforts he has continued to make since taking office. Gabon, my country, is particularly attentive to the “UN 80 Initiative” which aims for operational efficiency in the face of global challenges and the rationalization of mandates, within the United Nations system. Madam President, A year ago, before this august Assembly, as President of the Transition of the Gabonese Republic, I presented the political process initiated in my country since the Liberation Coup carried out on August 30, 2023. At the end of the presidential election of April 12, 2025, the process and results of which were unanimously welcomed by the International Community, this Transition ended with my inauguration, on May 3, 2025, as First elected President of the 5th Republic, thus establishing the foundations of the democratic order. As you know, Gabon experienced a peaceful, exemplary Transition marked by the inclusion of all the active forces of the Nation. This peaceful transition, open to an Inclusive National Dialogue, to a Constitutional Referendum and in accordance with the timetable it has set, which will continue with the organization of free and transparent legislative, local and senatorial elections. To do this, the first and second rounds of the twin legislative and local elections will be held on September 27 and October 11, 2025; Regarding the election of senators, this will take place on November 8 and the second round is set for November 29, 2025, with a view to a definitive return to constitutional order from January 2026. 5 We legitimately believe that this peaceful and historic process could also be the subject of teaching and study in various circles. The Gabonese people have drawn the resources for this success from their history, their culture of peace and their shared vision of the future. This is an opportunity for me to express, on behalf of the Gabonese people and myself, our sincere thanks to the United Nations for its multifaceted support. I also know that I can count on the support of the UN in the implementation of Gabon's Growth and Development Plan. This plan focuses on increasing our energy capacity, strengthening infrastructure, digital development and the employability of young people. Ladies and Gentlemen, 6 Gabon returns to you with a clear message: Our country has changed! After decades of tensions and political and economic excesses, the Gabonese people have chosen the path of reconciliation and renewal, thus becoming the symbol and proof that it is possible to transform ordeal into hope, dependence into dignity, division into unity, all without bloodshed. Today, Gabon is no longer a country in limbo, it is back alongside other States, standing, dignified and ready to assume its full place in the concert of nations. The new Gabon, worthy of envy that my compatriots are calling for with all their wishes, also means that the Gabonese State must now be at the service of its people. But our national renaissance would be in vain without changes in the international order. It is no longer acceptable for African nations to remain confined to the role of 7 suppliers of raw materials from which others set prices and profit. This is therefore the place for me to invite public and private investors to support us in win-win partnerships. We have decided to transform our resources on site, create jobs at home, develop African industrial sectors and dialogue with the world on the basis of fairness, probity and mutual respect, for our growth towards happiness. In its march towards development, Gabon, a country of peace and opportunities, will continue to be a welcoming land for all those who are committed to respecting our laws, our republican values ​​and contributing in an exemplary manner to the national effort. Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen This 80th Session of the General Assembly with the theme: “Better together: more than 8 80 years and more for peace, development and human rights”, is being held in an international context marked by political, economic, environmental and security crises which call for a more sustained and firmer collective commitment. This is an urgent invitation to address these concerns, in accordance with the spirit and values ​​of the United Nations Charter. Ladies and Gentlemen, The world today presents a profoundly different face. While humanity has never had so many technological means to ensure its well-being, international peace and security have never seemed so fragile and so threatened. It is high time that peace reigns on earth and particularly in Africa, so ravaged by conflicts whose principals and financiers are outside the continent. 9 Let the guns finally fall silent in the Democratic Republic of Congo, in Sudan, in the Horn of Africa and in the Sahel! In this regard, rather than always stigmatizing and condemning the Sahel States, the international community would benefit from supporting them in their fight against the terrorist hydra. Ladies and Gentlemen, On December 12, 1988, Gabon officially recognized the State of Palestine. Yesterday as today, we support the two-state solution, the only way, in accordance with United Nations resolutions, to guarantee a just and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians as well as international security. Likewise, Gabon can only reiterate its position in favor of lifting the embargo imposed on Cuba because of its negative impact on the well-being of the population. We solemnly reaffirm our full support for international efforts throughout the world to achieve peace. 10 These efforts should be focused on people, particularly women and young people. As part of the 2024 Future Compact, the UN must continue to encourage and support the crucial action of women resulting from the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which marks its 30th anniversary this year. Madam President of the General Assembly, Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, The triple planetary crisis of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution is an existential threat to humanity. However, the efforts of the international community in the face of these challenges remain dramatically insufficient. The Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdictions Treaty (BBNJ ) which we have just ratified, fills a legal void and offers an ambitious framework for equitable and sustainable governance of biodiversity. 11 Together, we have a real opportunity to make this Treaty a real lever of transformation for present and future generations. Gabon is the guardian of part of the Congo Basin, the second green lung on the planet. This exceptional heritage will not be sacrificed to financial appetites. We demand a fair global partnership where the protection of our forests is accompanied by fair remuneration for the ecological services provided to humanity. Ladies and Gentlemen, The New World Order is on the move. The ongoing changes in our societies are inevitable and cannot continue to be ignored. International peace and justice will only be guaranteed by a multilateralism 12 revitalized in particular by the reform of the Security Council taking into account the African demands expressed through the Sirte Declaration and the Ezulwini Consensus to which Gabon is firmly attached. Wishing our work every success, I wish our Organization a happy birthday. Thank you.