Page 0 of 26 
  
 
 
 
STATEMENT  
 
BY 
HIS EXCELLENCY MR. MOHAMMED B. S. 
JALLOW  
 
VICE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE GAMBIA  
AT THE  
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION 
OF THE  
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
 
NEW YORK  
SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
 
 

Page 1 of 26 
 Your Excellency Annalena Baerbock,  
President of the 80th Session of the UN General 
Assembly,   
H.E Antonio Gutteres, Secretary General of the 
United Nations,  
Your Majesties, Excellencies, Heads of State and 
Government,  
Heads of Delegation,  
Distinguished Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
As we commemorate the 80th Anniversary of the 
United Nations, it is with great honour that I deliver 
this statement on behalf of His Excellency Mr. 
Adama Barrow, President of the Republic of The 
Gambia and the Government and People of The 
Gambia.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 26 
 Madam President,  
 
Let me use this opportunity to congratulate you on 
behalf of the Government of The Gambia on your 
election as President of the 80th Session of the United 
Nations General Assembly. The Gambia assures you 
of its unwavering support and continued cooperation 
in the discharge of your duties.  
 
Permit me also to seize this moment to thank Mr. 
Philemon Yang, President of the 79th Session of the 
General Assembly for his wise leadership and for 
competently guiding the work of the Assembly during 
his tenure.  
 
Madam President,  
 
This Session is being held at a very pivotal moment 
for the international community. The enormity of the 
challenges of managing and resolving the ongoing 
and sporadic wars, conflicts, and threats to 
international peace and security require all Member 
Page 3 of 26 
 States to reaffirm their faith and collective 
commitment to the noble principles of the UN 
Charter.  
 
The Charter was crafted with great optimism to herald 
a new age and a new world that would reverse the 
horrors of the past and define a common destiny 
premised on our shared humanity. To keep these 
hopes alive, we must rekindle the ethos of solidarity 
through more multilateral engagement.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The Session holds a profound symbolism of progress 
for The Gambia. Against our long -standing 
commitment to the United Nations, our election as 
Chair of the 2nd Committee this year is historic, and it 
speaks to the great strides made towards shaping a 
stable and prosperous multilateral global order.  
 
Page 4 of 26 
 We remain committed to the search for innovative 
and timely solutions to our global challenges and will 
collaborate with all Member States to resolve them.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The United Nations (UN) serves as a driving force for 
multilateralism and the reaffirmation of the world’s 
collective faith in the sanctity of human rights, 
international peace, and security the world over.   
Importantly, h owever, the commemoration of the 
founding of the Organisation this year calls for a 
keener probe into the future and a reassertion of the 
UN as the premier global institution entrusted with 
the destiny of humanity.  
 
We must now do more to fulfil the commitments we 
assumed under the Pact for the Future. The protracted 
challenges of conflict and geopolitical fragmentation, 
including the threat to the spirit of multilateralism 
under the United Nations, doggedly linger on .  
Page 5 of 26 
  
As the world grapples with complex and 
unprecedented challenges on various fronts, the peace 
and security landscape is becoming increasingly 
fragile.  
 
Amid the changing nature of conflict, we are 
continually witnessing consequential disregard for 
the principles of International Humanitarian Law in 
conflict zones.  It is even more threatening that the 
rules -based international order is under enormous 
stress, thus losing its momentum, relevance, and 
moral underpinnings.  
 
The consequence of these developments reflects a 
desperate international community in search of 
answers to multiple predicaments simultaneously. 
Intricate as this may seem, The Gambia 
acknowledges that the UN’s enduring relevance and 
structural institution s contributed to momentous 
achievements of the past, particularly for countries in 
the global South.  
Page 6 of 26 
 In the case of The Gambia, the UN used its convening 
power and preventive diplomacy via the 
Peacebuilding Commission to support the 
democratically elected government that assumed 
office in 2017.  
 
 
That support was key to upholding the will of the 
Gambian people, ushering in the current government, 
and initiating a transitional justice system to promote 
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for human 
rights.  
 
Madam President,  
 
As we reflect on the timely adopted theme for this 
Session, “ Better Together: 80 years and more for 
peace, development and human rights ,’’ we must 
admit that the daunting challenges we face today 
require deliberate investment in sustainable 
development, climate action, peace, and security.  
Page 7 of 26 
 Since the change of government  in 2017 , the 
administration of His Excellency, Mr. Adama 
Barrow, has been pursu ing the path of inclusive 
development, peace, and respect for fundamental 
rights and freedoms. It strictly commits to according 
the needs of people topmost priority on our national 
development agenda.  
 
With the current national reform agenda for inclusive 
governance, Gambians set their eyes on building a 
future of immense potential and opportunities, partly 
through the implementation of the recommendations 
of our Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations 
Com mission.  
 
Over the past eight (8) years, the government 
successfully organised credible, transparent, and both 
nationally and internationally endorsed rounds of 
national elections.  
 
Page 8 of 26 
 Preparations are progressing smoothly for the 2026 
Presidential Election, and we remain resolved to 
maintaining international standards and consolidating 
participatory democracy, sustainable development, 
and good governance.  
 
Madam President,  
 
In our drive for broader reforms, we are building 
stronger state institutions, initiating legislative 
reforms and expanding the scope of our criminal 
jurisdiction to prosecute international atrocity crimes.  
 
Such reforms include the enactment of the Special 
Prosecutor’s Office Act 2024 to handle international 
crimes and serious rights violations. For the first time, 
we now have an Anti -Corruption Act to institute an 
Anti-Corruption Commission.  
 
 
 
Page 9 of 26 
 These examples typify efforts to deliver restorative 
and transformative justice, prevent impunity, 
construct a just and durable path towards nation -
building, and lay an unshakeable foundation for 
social justice.  
 
To support our development ambitions, as enshrined 
in our National Development Plan (YIRIWA) 2023 -
2027, we have operationalised a national budgeting 
mechanism grounded in human development to 
promote investment and national development.  
  
Our goal is to rise above our socio -economic 
challenges through inclusive engagement in 
democratic governance. This has propelled us to 
ensure that democracy, respect for fundamental 
rights, and the building of institutional mechanisms 
sustainably thrive .  
 
 
 
Page 10 of 26 
 In building a peaceful society, we recognise the 
integral role of young people and women and, 
therefore, support their representation and 
participation in the democratic functioning of the 
state.  
 
Madam President,  
 
In parallel, we value the consolidation of democracy 
and good governance in our neighbourhood. In this 
spirit, The Gambia recently hosted the Sahel 
Governance Forum to galvanise a multi -stakeholder 
convergence to address and find definitive solutions 
to go vernance challenges that hamper peace, stability, 
and development in the Sahel.  
 
Spurred on by a strong commitment to international 
peace, security, and human rights, The Gambia 
remains  a staunch member of the African Union 
Peace and Security Council, the UN Human Rights 
Council, and participates in peacekeeping operations.  
Page 11 of 26 
 The Gambia continues to promote international peace 
and security as well as the consolidation of 
democratic governance and partnerships for African 
security.  
 
It is significant that the AU and the UN collaborate 
closely to address regional peace and security 
matters, and this includes recalibration of preventive 
diplomacy tools for maximum impact. Likewise, the 
need to strengthen early warning mechanisms and 
prioritise the protection of children affected by armed 
conflict is strongly evident.  
 
Madam President,  
 
By re -echoing the mantra of ‘‘The Africa we want’’ 
and ‘‘An Africa at peace with itself,’’ The Gambia 
believes that more needs to be invested in conflict 
prevention. Consequently, we call on the UN Security 
Council to fulfil its responsibility towards reso lving 
the unrest in Africa and elsewhere.  
 
Page 12 of 26 
 The rising levels of inequality are indicative of the 
unequal global economic system, creating huge 
imbalances for countries in the Global South, 
particularly in Africa, to address poverty, debt, and 
unemployment.  
 
It is indeed disheartening that five years towards the 
end of the targeted Agenda 2030 deadline, much 
remains to be accomplished. Worse still, the 
realisation of its goals and milestones appear to be 
profoundly remote.  
 
 
Madam President,  
 
The high death  rates, displacement s, and untold 
suffering of civilians in the Middle East, Asia, Africa, 
Europe, and other corners of the world are truly 
unacceptable. All the raging conflicts around the 
world need to stop immediately.  
 
Page 13 of 26 
 Fortunately, the 2025 peacebuilding architecture 
review presents a golden opportunity to agree on 
stronger preventive arrangements and measures for 
conflict prevention.  
 
As members of the United Nations and conscientious 
global citizens, we must continue to collectively 
pursue responsive and purposive actions by exhorting 
all hostile factions to dialogue for peace.  
 
We must also contribute to effective security 
arrangements and frameworks not only to prevent 
conflicts but also protect civilians, particularly 
women, children, and the elderly.  
 
Contending parties in each conflict zone must allow 
immediate and uninterrupted humanitarian aid to 
reach the suffering populations and commit to ending 
all hostilities. The bleeding must stop  soonest.   
 
Madam President,  
Page 14 of 26 
  
The plight of the Palestinians remains unresolved, 
with innocent civilians continuing to face shocking 
difficulties under dire humanitarian conditions. Yet, 
the Palestinian predicament predominantly rests on 
the core principles of justice, respect for inte rnational 
humanitarian law, and self -determination.  
  
As such, we cannot remain unperturbed by the 
worsening state of affairs in that region. It is 
imperative that we act urgently and collectively to 
revitalise the prospects for an inclusive peace process 
for Israel, Palestine, and the region.  
 
In this context, The Gambia re -echoes its call for a 
two-state solution to urgently enable the Palestinian 
people to regain their legitimate national rights, as 
conceived by the International Community through 
its recognition of a State of Palestine within  the 1967 
borders, with Al -Quds Al Shareef as its capital.  
 
Page 15 of 26 
 We support the membership of Palestine into the 
United Nations. In this spirit, we commend the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and France for the recently 
concluded High -level Conference on the Question of 
Palestine.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The Gambia applauds and supports the efforts of the 
UN Secretary -General in relaunching the Moroccan 
Sahara round table process to achieve a realistic and 
sustainable political solution in that regional dispute.  
We also welcome Morocco’s commitment to the 
ceasefire, full cooperation with MINURSO,  and 
relaunching of the political process, based on the 
parameters of Resolution 2756 (2024).  
 
In this regard, we call on Polisario to abandon its 
unilateral withdrawal from the ceasefire and lift 
restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement and 
provision of supplies to MINURSO. By the same 
token, we urge all parties, Morocco, Algeria, 
Page 16 of 26 
 Mauritania and Polisario, to work towards a 
pragmatic and sustainable political solution based on 
compromise.  
 
The positive impact of the Moroccan Autonomy 
Initiative, which we accept as realistic and credible, is 
already well received, and the people of the region 
continue to enjoy peace, development, and the 
protection of their human rights; thanks to the 
Governm ent of the Kingdom of Morocco’s  New 
Development Model for the Moroccan Sahara 
Region.  
 
Furthermore, The Gambia lauds the launch by His 
Majesty Mohammed VI, King of Morocco, of the 
Morocco -Nigeria Gas Pipeline, the Atlantic African 
Initiative, and the Sahel Countries Access to the 
Atlantic. These three Royal Initiatives will give a new 
impetu s to the Moroccan Sahara Region by 
establishing it as a new platform of security, stability, 
and development.  
 
Page 17 of 26 
 Madam President,  
 
The Gambia continues to stand with the People's 
Republic of China on their One China Policy. China’s 
commitment to international cooperation and broad 
development support instructively exposes the 
elasticity of sustainable development and expansion 
of Sout h-South and Triangular Cooperation 
prospects.  
 
 
Similarly, The Gambia reiterates the call for lifting 
the economic embargo imposed on the brotherly 
people of Cuba. The embargo continues to inflict 
undue hardship and economic devastation, hence 
occasioning substantial challenges for the 
Government and Pe ople of Cuba. We believe it 
should give way to friendly cooperation. That is the 
way forward.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Page 18 of 26 
 As we mark twenty -five (25) years since the adoption 
of Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, 
Peace, and Security, we should firmly renew the 
conviction that the attainment of sustainable 
development and the consolidation of peace and 
security are anc hored in the principle of inclusive 
representation for women in all spheres of political 
and decision -making processes.  
 
While considerable progress has been made towards 
women’s inclusion in public life, their participation in 
the consolidation of peace and security continues to 
be constrained by significant impediments that we 
must dislodge. Because they usually bear the b runt of 
unrests, women must always participate in 
discussions on conflict and peace.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 26 
 As nations sharing the same destiny, and in 
preparation for the fourth (4th) World Conference on 
Women, we have the moral obligation and collective 
responsibility to act swiftly to address all issues 
hampering the empowerment of women. These 
include institutional advancement and increasing 
women’s contribution to peace and securi ty 
consolidation.  
 
Madam President,  
 
In view of the outcome of FfD4, it is our hope that the 
international financial architecture and mechanisms 
will change for the better. Meanwhile, the current 
international financing architecture, especially on 
debt restructuring, continues to hinder the 
development aspirations of developing countries.  
 
Due to limited fiscal space exerted by distressing debt 
burdens, developing countries find it hard to make 
significant investments in the social sectors.  
Page 20 of 26 
 The challenge is even more profound with regard to 
investments in the productive base of their economies 
to engender growth, employment, and development.  
 
The situation has contributed remarkably to the 
dismal attainment of only seventeen percent (17%) of 
the SDGs. To accelerate the full and effective 
implementation of the SDGs within the targeted 
timeframe, we must enhance international finance 
cooperation and review the international financial 
architecture.  
 
We must create arrangements, facilities, and 
mechanisms that would cater for targeted 
investments, industrialisation, and mechanisation 
initiatives for development strides in all sectors.  
 
Madam President,  
 
 
 
Page 21 of 26 
 The Pact for the Future, adopted at the 79th Session of 
the General Assembly, presents a huge opportunity to 
review our realities, invigorate the implementation of 
SDG Agenda 2030, and intensify efforts to confront 
the pressing challenges of the time.  
 
The Gambia supports convening the preparatory 
process to review the Pact in 2028 and align it 
effectively with all relevant inter -governmental 
processes, such as the 2025 Peacebuilding 
Architecture Review, the High -level Plenary meeting 
to commemorate the 30th Anniversary of the World 
Programme of Action on Youth, and the World Social 
Summit.  
  
The success of these reviews depends primarily on 
our commitment and concerted push to build a more 
equitable and resilient global governance framework 
that supports the attainment of our global goals.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Page 22 of 26 
 The UN reform agenda will remain incomplete 
without reform of the UN Security Council. The 
Gambia supports the Common African position on 
reforming the Council, as set out in the Sirte 
Declaration and the Ezulwini Consensus.  
 
We strongly believe that Africa’s under -
representation in the permanent and non -permanent 
categories of the Security Council is a historical 
injustice that needs urgent correction.  
 
Africa has always contributed to global peace, and 
Africans paid a high price for participating in the two 
World Wars.  
 
The Gambia believes that the time has come for the 
international community to support Africa’s call for 
meaningful representation in the Security Council. 
Doing so will guarantee the Council’s legitimacy and 
credibility as the body responsible for maintain ing 
international peace and security.  
 
Page 23 of 26 
 We commend the AU Committee of Ten Heads of 
State and Government on the United Nations Security 
Council Reforms (C -10), chaired by His Excellency 
the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, for ably 
spearheading this legitimate quest.  
 
Madam President,  
 
As we witness heightened levels of insecurity 
worldwide, the threat of climate change continues to 
aggravate security challenges, especially in the Sahel. 
We thus have to address the impact of the climate 
crisis as part of vital resilience measures to miti gate 
climate -related risks that intersect with political, 
social, and economic factors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 26 
 The Gambia acknowledges the progress made at 
COP29 in Baku, Azerbaijan, for moving from one 
billion dollars (US$100 billion) to the NEW 
COLLECTIVE QUANTIFIED GOAL (NQCG), 
which is still inadequate to finance all the mitigation 
and adaptation actions, espec ially for countries in 
special circumstances.  
 
It is essential to take concrete decisions at COP30 in 
Belem, Brazil, to galvanise support for more climate 
financing. The Gambia calls for more ambitious 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) by all 
states, due for submission this year, to achieve ne t-
zero emissions by 2050.  
 
Madam President,  
Before concluding, allow me to call on Member 
States to use this Session to forge a new consensus of 
uniting behind a shared determination to make the 
United Nations a potent instrument to realise our 
common purposes and aspirations as one human 
family. Th is is our only planet. Let us preserve it for 
posterity.  
Page 25 of 26 
  
The Gambia is committedly disposed to participating 
actively in making the world a better place for all. On 
behalf of His Excellency Mr. Adama Barrow and the 
Government and People of The Gambia, I wish you 
all fruitful deliberations to advance the theme of  this 
80th Session of the General Assembly.  
 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
 
 
 