1 
 Madame La Présidente ,  
Heads of Government and State,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
It is an hono ur to address this Assembly for the seventh time as Prime Minister 
of Greece.  
 
This year carries special weight  as w e celebrate the 80th anniversary of the 
United Nations . Eighty years of hope, struggle, and progress.  
 
This milestone coincides with a n important moment for Greece : our third tenure 
as a non -permanent member of the Security Council.  
 
We accept this responsibility with honor  and with a deep sense of duty, as a 
nation that stood at the birth of this Organization .  Like so many other nations , 
my country  came here devastated by the horrors  of World War II.  
 
The Charter of the United Nations was not just a legal document. It was a 
commitment that never again should force prevail over  the rule of law .  
 
For eight decades, the UN has defended peace, advanced human rights, and 
expanded access to health, education,  and equality for all.    
 
It has stood as the custodian of international law, safeguarding the rules and 
principles that make international cooperation possible . 
 
 
 
2 
 The United Nations  was at the epicenter of a historic turning point. It gave voice 
to the aspirations of peoples long denied freedom.  
 
Decolonization brought new nations into this Assembly. They brought their 
histories, their cultures, their aspirations.  Their participation helped redress 
historical injustice s and transformed the Organization into a true reflection of our 
world’s diversity.  
 
These achievements are real progress. They have made our world safer, fairer, 
and more prosperous. But they should never be taken for gr anted. They were 
won through effort and sacrifice .  And  they remain fragile.  
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
A new global order is on the rise.  Multilateralism is under strain  and f undamental 
tenets of the post -1945  world are being questioned .  
 
We witness  attempts to revive the imperial ambitions of previous centuries.  
Revisionist narratives are resurging.  Some leaders remain trapped in the past , 
chasing illusions of bygone glory.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 “Might over right ” risks once again becoming the norm in international relations .  
A norm the international community has sought to overcome for more than 
eighty years .  
 
And this trend is strengthening at a time when g lobal challenges continue to 
multiply. Climate change. Migration. The advent of a rtificial intelligence . 
 
Our world is changing. We must meet this change with courage and 
responsibility , but never at the expense of the principles that form the very fabric  
of the international community  represented in this assembly : respect for 
territorial integrity and the peaceful resolution of disputes.    
 
Being situated at the crossroads of three continents, Greece is a pillar of stability 
and a reliable broker in a turbulent region.  
 
Our sta nce is principled . We uphold the principles international law. We seek 
dialogue and peaceful coexistence with our neighbors.  
 
Some claim that principles are naïve in today’s world. We believe the opposite: 
they are the source of strength and the only path  to lasting peace.  
 
We are certainly not naïve.  We remain fully aware of the threats and the risks 
of instability in our wider neighborhood.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 That is why we are strengthening our economy, enhancing our deterren ce 
capabilities, and deepening our alliance .  So that we stand ready to defend and 
uphold our values.  
 
This is not just words: Greece is already allocating over 3% of its GDP to 
defence and we are ready to do more . Security is the very foundation of 
prosperi ty.  After all, o ur paramount obligation as leaders is to keep our people 
safe.  
 
And we do this not in isolation . We are firmly anchored in the European Union , 
the most successful multilateral project of our age. Born from the ashes of the 
Second World War, the European Union has secured peace and prosperity in 
Europe for generations.  
 
But today, we must go further. And in the European Union we are determined 
to take on a stronger role in our own defen ce.  With war returning to our 
continent there is simply no other option.  
 
Greece has long and consistently advocated for strengthening the EU’s 
strategic autonomy. We firmly believe that the time has come for joint European 
borrowing to finance critical European defense projects such as missile and 
drone defense.   
 
Beyond that i t is imperative that we make Article 42.7 on the mutual assistance  
clause truly operational.  
 
 
 
5 
 Jean Monnet famously said that Europe was forged in crises and will be the 
sum of the solutions adopted for those crises.  He was right. What started as a 
project of economic cooperation needs to evolve in to a Union that safeguards 
our citizens’ security and safety .   
 
 
Colleagues , 
 
Today w e are witnessing the highest number of armed conflicts since the end 
of the Second World War.  
 
Conflicts that claim tens of  thousands of civilian lives each year.  
 
Conflicts that leave behind mass destruction, shattered societies, and displaced 
millions. And the prospects, if we fail to act, are even grimmer .  A future of 
escalating violence and deepening instability.  
 
Nowhere is this urgency more evident than in Gaza.  
 
Greece has from the first day after the heinous attacks of October 7th, 2023 
advocated for Israel’s right to defend itself, against a terrorist organization that 
rejects Israel’s right to exist.   
 
We have  called for the immediate release of all hostages and a comprehensive 
cease fire.  
 
 
 
6 
 But we have at the same time made very clear that no military targets, no matter 
how valuable they are, can justify the death of thousands of children, the forced 
displacem ent of over a million Palestinians within the Gaza strip, and the 
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people.  
 
Greece maintains a strategic partnership with Israel. But this does not prevent 
us from speaking openly and frankly.  
 
The continuation of th is course of action will ultimately harm Israel’s own 
interests, leading to an erosion of international support.  
 
I tell my Israeli friends that they risk alienating all their remaining friends if they 
persist on a path that is shattering the potential of a  two-state solution.  
 
Greece will continue to advocate for a two-state  solution which envisions the 
creation of a sovereign, democratic and viable State of Palestine , building its 
future in peace and security alongside the State of Israel.  
 
But we should be lucid about the roadmap towards achieving that elusive 
goal.  Israel’s actions in the West Bank risk creating irreversible situations on 
the ground.   
 
At present , the most necessary is to stop the unnecessary killing and ensure 
the large -scale and sustaina ble delivery of humanitarian aid to Gaza.  
 
 
 
7 
 Greece remains committed to working with all our partners towards a roadmap 
that will achieve th is goal and will revive a peace process , offering hope to a 
region which has suffered so much.  
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen , 
  
The war in Ukraine is already in its 4th year. U kraine’s courageous resistance to 
Russia’s aggression stands as a testimony of unparalleled bravery  and 
remarkable resilience.  
 
The war in Ukraine is not another regional European conflict. It is a fight for 
freedom, for democracy,  and for dignity itself. It is, above all, a defense of the 
rules -based global order.  
 
We stand  firmly and unconditionally with Ukraine in this struggle. And we will 
continue our unwavering support to the Ukrainian people  who have the right to 
live in peace, in security, and freely determine their own future.   
 
We appreciate President Trump’s efforts to reach peace  and we reiterate that  a 
genuine peace proce ss cannot begin without an immediate ceasefire.  
 
And let us be even clearer: there can be no peace formula without Ukraine at 
the table  and there can be no acceptance, under any circumstances, of borders 
redrawn by force . 
 
 
 
8 
 Gaza and Ukraine have monopolized the interest of this assembly but another 
humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding and, unfortunately, does not receive the 
attention it deserves.  
 
I am referring  to Sudan . Two and half  years into a devastating war, civilians are 
paying the highest price. Millions are left without safety, dignity, or protection.  
 
The figures are horrifying: Almost 12 million people have been forced from their 
homes, creating the world’s largest displacement crisis. More than 30 million 
require humanitarian aid. Famine is spreading.  
 
Civilians must be protected. Humanitarian aid must flow freely and without 
obstruction. And those responsible for atrocities and war crimes must be held 
to account.  
 
There is only one path forward: silence the guns, and renew a coordinated 
political process.  
 
The world must not forget the people of Sudan. We owe them nothing less than 
peace , and the chance of a future built on hope, not despair.    
 
As Europeans it is also in our interest to take an active role in resolving the 
Sudan crisis . Otherwise we risk facing a migration crisis od unimaginable 
proportions.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 Dear Friends , 
 
The Eastern Mediterranean is an area of strategic importance .  Europe’s 
southeastern frontier, a vital crossroads of trade and energy routes.  
 
Greece, at the heart of this region, holds a key geostrategic position. We aspire 
to becoming an energy security provider, linking Europe with North Africa and 
the Middle East.  
 
By exercising our sovereign rights , always in full respect of Internati onal Law , 
we are strengthening our footprint and shaping developments in the area.  
 
 
Connectivity projects such as the Great Sea Interconnector and the GREGY 
project between Greece and Egypt are projects of  mutual benefit , advancing 
stability and ensuring that our electricity grids are better connected . 
 
They will diversify Europe’s energy supply, accelerate the green transition  and, 
above all, bring our region closer together.  
 
Renewables are the future, and in Greece we have already made significant 
stride s in this field. But we also remain pragmatic: fossil fuels will continue to 
play a role in our energy mix, with natural gas serving as the bridge in the 
transition.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 That is why we are investing in the infrastructure that will make Greece an LNG 
hub. And at the same time, together with our American partners, we are 
advancing the exploration and potential exploitation of our offshore gas 
reserves , a resource of strategi c value for Greece and Europe.  
 
Yet the Eastern Mediterranean also faces profound challenges: climate change, 
migration, persistent conflict. The only way to meet them is through cooperation , 
built on leadership, political will, and a shared sense of responsibility.  
 
In all our relations with our neighbors, Greece is guided by a single, unwavering 
compass: respect for international law. This is the cornerstone of our foreign 
policy, and the basis upon which we seek dialogue and genuine cooperation.  
 
Let me begin with our relations with Türkiye.  Greece seeks peaceful 
coexistence with our neighbor. In recent years, we have succeeded in 
maintaining low tensions , and this is a positive development that we should not 
underestimate.  
 
However,  the calm seas we have witnessed over the past 2 years  must not be 
fleeting. They must allow us to build trust, find common ground, and pursue 
solutions in the interest of both our peoples.  
 
The way forward lies in dialogue, in respect for international law, and in the 
vision of a region defined not by rivalry, but by shared prosperity . 
 
 
 
 
11 
 As I have repeatedly stressed from this podium, we are ready to work toward 
settling the only outstanding is sue between us: the delimitation of the 
continental shelf and the Exclusive Economic Zone in the Aegean and the 
Eastern Mediterranean.  
 
Türkiye must remove the threat of war that still hangs as a dark cloud over our 
relations . After thirty years, the casus  belli has to be revoked .  It has no place in 
relations between friendly neighbors. Our path forward must be one of 
diplomacy, not the language of weapons.  
 
For 51 years, Cyprus  has endured the consequences of Türkiye’s  illegal 
invasion and continued military occupation . A blatant violation of international 
law and a constant strain to regional  peace and security.  
 
Our commitment to Cyprus’ sovereignty, territorial integrity and the solution of 
one state based on a bi-zonal, bi -communal federation is steadfast. It is a matter 
of credibility and determination to defend the core values and principles upon 
which the United Nations are based.  
 
Greece fully supports the efforts of the Secretary -General and his Personal 
Envoy to  give new impetus to the  resumption of negotiations.  
 
A just and viable settlement will serve the interests of the Cypriot people and 
contribute decisively to the stability of the wider region.  
 
 
 
12 
 Turning to Libya , our two countries share maritime bor ders.  It is t herefore in our 
common interest to reach  a fair and lawful delimitation agreement, in line with 
the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.  
 
Yet true stability in our neighborhood also depends on Libya itself being united 
and sovereign.  
 
The Libyan people must be free to determine their future without foreign 
interference, and Greece stands ready to assist constructively in UN -led efforts 
to ac hieve a political solution and reunite the country.  
 
When it comes to Syria , after fourteen years of bloodshed, last December 
brought a moment of change and a new hope for the Syrian people.  
 
The future must be built on tolerance, dialogue, and full politica l representation 
for all religious and ethnic communities.  
 
Only then can Syria’s diverse society find peace and prosperity , free from 
sectarian violence and external interference.  
 
I made it clear to the Syrian president that our support regarding Syria’s  
rapprochement  with Europe is conditional upon the protection of religious and 
ethnic communities, in particular the Christian Orthodox minority which has 
been repeatedly targeted by Muslim extremists.  
 
 
 
13 
 At the same time, we expect the Syrian authorities to act in full accordance with 
international law , including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the 
Sea. 
 
Finally, let me turn to the Western Balkans , our immediate neighbors, strategic 
partners of the European Union, and candidate members of our common family.  
The region has made remarkable progress over the past decades . Yet the 
balance remains delicate with the risk of backsliding still present.  
 
The future of the Western Balkans lies within the European Union. Greece has 
been a pioneer in this endeavor, through the Thessaloniki Agenda, which set 
the path for the region’s European perspective.  
 
This path must be grounded in full respect for interna tional law, existing 
international agreements, the rule of law, human rights, and minority rights. It 
requires rejecting revisionist agendas and building trust among neighbors.   The 
ghosts of Balkan nationalism had haunted the region for centuries.  The mu st 
not be allowed to reemerge.  
 
It is up to the leadership of the Western Balkans to assume their responsibilities 
and secure a future of peace and prosperity for their people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,   
 
Let me conclude by returning to a topic I also addressed i n my speech at the 
general assembly last year.  Technology  is both our greatest shared opportunity 
and one of the defining challenges for our future prosperity .  
 
Last year, I spoke about Artificial Intelligence . and its extraordinary 
transformatory promise , but I also warned of the dangers it breeds. Today , 
Greece is pursuing a visionary  yet practical AI strategy , through pilot programs 
in areas such as  education, healthcare and natural disaster prevention.  
 
Teachers and students will soon engage with custom -designed AI teaching 
assistants . Digital screenings, telemedicine  and predictive diagnostics are 
already making care more personalized and accessible.  
 
At the same, AI is also helping us detect and contain wildfires at their earliest 
stages .  The promise of AI making governments more efficient in serving their 
citizens is materializing at breakneck spe ed. 
 
However, AI in the wrong hands, and without safeguards, can become 
extremely dangerous .  It can severely impact our children’s mental health, flood 
our public square with disinformation, cause massive displacements  in the job 
market and concentrate immense power in the hands of a few multinational 
corporations . 
 
 
 
 
15 
 That is why I welcome the U nited Nations’s establis hment of  the Independent 
International Scientific Panel on AI and  the Global Dialogue on AI Governance . 
These institutions lay the foundations of a global architecture where AI can be 
steered by science and guided by cooperation.  
 
The most urgent task is to protect the mental health of our children .  The 
scientific evidence in damning. We are running a massive unsupervised 
experiment with the brains of our children and teenagers.  
 
What was once envisioned as a space of connection and creativity has too often 
become a landscape of manipulation,  where harmful content reaches even the 
youngest users. Addictive scrolling is add ictive by design, not by accident .    
 
Every time I talk to parents I hear the same story.  We are scare d about  online 
bullying, adult content, unrealistic standards  of beauty, promotion of self -harm.  
We feel po werless and helpless.  We don’t want our kids to share their intimate 
thoughts and feelings with a n AI chatbot.  
 
Greece has decided to do something . We have banned phones in our schools.   
But we have also launched  Kids Wallett, the first government -backed 
application giving parents simple, effective controls over their kids’ smartphone 
while enabling platforms to verify the age of their users.   
 
Our proposal for a pan -European Digital Age of Majority to access digital 
platforms  has already won the support of 13 EU Member States , and is 
examined by the European Commission . 
 
 
16 
 But this  is not a debate for governments and parents alone. Just as society o nce 
set firm rules for smoking, drinking, or wearing a seatbelt, we must now confront 
today’s challenge with equal clarity: big platforms can no longer profit at the 
expense of our children’s mental health.  A business model built capturing our 
kids’ attenti on through addictive algorith ms that feed  them what can justifiably 
be labeled  as di gital junk is simply not acceptable.  
 
Let me repeat what I said last year.  Digital technology is no different than any 
other industry that needs to operate under health and  safety regulations .  The 
overarching principle, the golden standard is one and the same:  Do no harm.  
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
Looking back to the foundation of the UN, means to recall, and acknowledge, 
that the need for effective multilateralism is as necessary in 2025, as it was in 
1945.  
 
There is no doubt: multilateralism must be reinvigorated. We must make it fit for 
the challenges of the third decade of the 21st century . But we must do it without  
disrupting its core, the rules -based order.  
 
These rule s were agreed for a reason. To save humanity. To ensure progress 
and prosperity for all.  
 
 
 
 
17 
 Humanity paid a heavy toll through blood , destruction, and suffering to learn this 
lesson.  We must assume our responsibilities to future generations.  
 
Let us not be remembered as those who once again led the world to the brink.  
Let us not be the sleepwalkers of our time. For, this time, there may be no way 
back.  
 
Instead, let us prove we have the vision, courage, and resolve to build a world 
of peace, security, and sha red prosperity , worthy of the generations to come.  
 
Thank you very much.  