STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA DOCTOR BERNARDO ARÉVALO DE LEÓN ON THE OCCASION OF THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION New York, September 24, 2025 • Madam President of the General Assembly, Annalena Baerbock; • Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, António Guterres; • Heads of State, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen; Very good afternoon. Nink'am chaq jun resilal tuqtukilal ut sahil ch'oolejil cho'q reheb' li tenamit sa' ruchich'ch', sa' xk'ab'a'eb' li kahiib' chi tenamit re Watemaal. [I bring a message of peace and harmony to the people of the world, on behalf of the 4 peoples of Guatemala] These words come from central America, from the territories that the Q'eqchi' people have inhabited for centuries in the north of Guatemala. I greet you with the language spoken in the region of Verapaz, of “true peace”; that region that could only be incorporated into the Spanish colonial government through peaceful means, after 20 years of dignified resistance. I bring with me these words to call for the “true peace” that today seems so far away. In the ancestral calendar of the Mayan peoples, periods of 20 years are called katunes. Therefore, we can say that in 2025 four katuns will have passed since the United Nations was founded. That implies that we are closing one cycle and starting another. An opportunity opens before us to seek well-being; to reflect and repair; to do justice; to start again. Eighty years ago, the people and governments of the world decided to found a new way of relating. From the rubble of a war that shook the deepest convictions of Humanity in all corners of the planet, the certainty of dialogue and cooperation emerged as central tools to build a new world. To turn fear, dismay and shame into hope, responsibility and a firm commitment to peace. Today the shadows of war appear again on the horizon and the military abuses committed against vulnerable communities offend all of humanity. The current crisis is a reality check, as it is clear that we have not done enough to achieve the ideal of a world where the life and dignity of all people is unquestionably respected. We must remember the transformative impulse of 1945 and the courage of those leaders who dared to think that a world of peace, justice, solidarity and harmony was possible, and began to work to build it. Those before us imagined, built and inherited a permanent forum for dialogue and mutual knowledge, based on the conviction that the destiny of each nation is also the destiny of humanity; where the voices of all countries would be heard, regardless of the size of their territory, their economy, or their army. A multilateral forum guided by the principle of sovereign equality, oriented towards peace and committed to the non-repetition of the suffering of the past and the full validity of human rights. This organization was built on the principle that no nation alone can guarantee global security. It should have been clear to us that power without effective controls has the potential to produce irreparable tears in the fabric of humanity. We should have learned that advances in science and technology can produce unimaginable catastrophes if we leave them in the hands of unchecked power. We should have learned that any international mechanism needs to include strong, binding and enforceable agreements to be effective. Ladies and gentlemen delegates: How much has the world changed since 1945? This organization contributed significantly to the decolonization processes, and has contributed to the ending and stabilization of conflicts. armed throughout the world, including Guatemala. The different bodies of the United Nations have actively sought well-being in all corners of the earth, achieving very important advances through cooperation and mutual support, in areas such as public health, environmental protection, the fight against poverty and the promotion of gender equality. Guatemala has experienced first-hand the watershed that the founding of the UN represented by universalizing multilateral diplomacy to address different conflicts. Our country attended the San Francisco Conference with the impetus and transformative enthusiasm of the democratic revolution of October 20, 1944, a revolution that even today is a fundamental support for continental aspirations of sovereignty, dignity and genuine independence. However, starting in 1960, Guatemalans faced one of the longest and bloodiest internal wars on our continent, which cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of people, which involved countless human rights violations, and opened a deep wound in the collective soul of Guatemalan society. That long chapter of intolerance and political violence came to an end in 1996. Since then, our governments adopted the Peace Accords as instruments that ensure the validity of human rights and the non-repetition of the horror we left behind. The support of the United Nations Verification Mission for Guatemala (Minugua) was decisive in ensuring that the various sectors of the country were certain that peace was possible. This is a fight that does not stop and continues to pose important challenges for our society. Guatemalan democracy has been supported by the United Nations and other multilateral bodies, such as the Organization of American States. In recent decades we have received support to strengthen our justice institutions, and to combat corruption and impunity. This has contributed to the people of Guatemala strengthening their fight to guarantee an effective government, an independent justice system, clean and transparent elections, and a future of progress and well-being. After a long cycle of institutional dismantling, in which corruption was the conventional way for the system to function, Guatemala is returning to the path of democratic recovery. We are convinced that cleaning up institutions is an essential way to consolidate democracy, despite the difficulties involved in the constant harassment we receive from antidemocratic actors entrenched in our justice system. In a hostile context, we have taken actions to fight corruption and impunity, and to promote transparency and accountability. My administration firmly defends, promotes and protects human rights, and remains committed to safeguarding the freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We open the doors again, after more than seven years, to the control mechanisms of the Universal System for the Protection of Human Rights. We have received seven official visits, including that of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; that of the Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, and that of the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing. However, the results we have achieved to date are not enough. The process of change we are currently going through requires improving the way we make collective decisions. In a country where exclusion and discrimination was a daily occurrence in public administration, my government is breaking historical barriers and working hand in hand with the ancestral authorities of indigenous peoples, with civil society and with various business sectors so that, together, we can promote development in all corners of the country. We know that there is no democracy without social justice, nor social justice without democracy. We are facing a definitive fight against corrupt and authoritarian people who seek at all costs to keep institutions captured and perpetuate impunity. In their desire to pervert justice, they criminalize and persecute indigenous leaders who defended democracy like Luis Pacheco, journalists who denounce corruption like José Rubén Zamora, justice operators like Virginia Laparra, and anyone who opposes their designs of corruption and impunity, pushing them into exile or imprisoning them spuriously. The year 2026 will be crucial for Guatemala, as new authorities must be elected in key control and justice bodies. It is essential that these election processes be carried out with transparency, impartiality and adherence to the law, which is why we have formally requested the technical and political support of our strategic partners to ensure that they meet the highest standards of legitimacy. Preserving our democracy and the possibility of building a true rule of law in Guatemala depend on it. I invite the international community to continue supporting these efforts through technical monitoring, institutional support and cooperative monitoring. Madam President, ladies and gentlemen delegates: In addition to our internal efforts, Guatemala has assumed its commitments to its neighbors and to the world. We are strengthening our capacity to serve the thousands of migrants who transit through our territory, ensuring for them the dignified treatment that we demand for Guatemalans who are outside our territory. In parallel, we are decisively addressing the structural causes of poverty that forces so many Guatemalans to migrate, and we are strengthening the care we provide to our citizens in the United States and Mexico. Together with our neighbors we are promoting important initiatives to combat transnational organized crime and drug trafficking. We actively participate in seven peacekeeping missions, and we also contribute one hundred and fifty troops to the Multinational Security Support Mission in Haiti (MSS). We support the Secretary General's proposal for this mission to be transformed into a hybrid mission, supported by the Organization and financed with funds from permanent contributions for peacekeeping. We reaffirm our support for Haiti and its efforts to achieve stability with the support of the international community. Ladies and gentlemen, delegates: Climate change is the greatest existential threat facing humanity, and we can only address it through joint action by the peoples and governments of the world. An example of this is the collaboration that we have established with our neighbors in Mexico and Belize to ensure the protection of the Biocultural Corridor of the Great Mayan Forest, which is one of the main lungs of the continent. Although Guatemala is responsible for a minimal fraction of global emissions, we are one of the most vulnerable countries to their effects. For this reason, we have reactivated and strengthened the National Climate Change Council, in charge of reviewing national plans, strategies and goals that contribute to the search for common solutions. Guatemala recognizes that many countries need effective access to climate finance, technology transfer and capacity building, which is why we urge all countries to fulfill their climate finance commitments and accelerate the implementation of the Paris Agreement. Cooperating with our neighbors to protect people who migrate; taking the necessary measures to recover our environment; actively participating in peacekeeping operations; offering our experience and our knowledge wherever it is needed: this is how Guatemala does its part of this great mosaic of the United Nations. Madam President: The future resolution of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) will put an end to the Territorial, Insular and Maritime Dispute with Belize. With the written phase already concluded and awaiting the oral hearings for next year and an eventual ruling, we are facing a historic opportunity to open a new stage in the relationship between both countries. Resolving this controversy peacefully is an example of how even the most complex disputes can lead to peace and cooperation. Guatemala reiterates its commitment to strengthening our bilateral relations with Belize on the basis of mutual respect, peaceful cooperation and observance of International Law. Distinguished delegates: We are at a crossroads. In times where dialogue and the search for consensus are seen as signs of weakness; in times where the shadow of authoritarianism grows in many places on the planet; In times where misinformation leads many people to desire “quick solutions” even if that means sacrificing freedoms, we have the obligation to reaffirm the values ​​and principles of solidarity that have guided the spirit of this organization for 80 years. My country urgently calls to remember that multilateralism is a matter of humanity. Of humanity understood as the group of human beings who inhabit this planet and who aspire to equality, happiness and well-being. But also humanity understood as the quality that human beings have of feeling empathy. To feel compassion. To feel deeply offended by any type of injustice committed against one of our fellow human beings. For Guatemala it is very clear that injustice, anywhere in the world, is unacceptable. Our main task as the United Nations is to recover a certainty: that we can and must live together in peace. The universal aspiration for a world without war and the desire for sustainable peace necessarily involves ensuring legitimate, open and plural processes so that decision-making is more effective. This search for legitimacy should not be a brake or an excuse to delay necessary actions. The United Nations has not fulfilled our mandate to act when a military apparatus devastates individuals, families, communities and entire populations in the name of security and sovereignty, as is happening right now in Ukraine, Sudan and Gaza. We must immediately stop the attacks and guarantee the entry of humanitarian aid to all territories at war. We must stop the invasion of Ukraine. A stop to the war in Sudan. A complete stop to the suffering and death of the civilian population in Gaza. We also call for the immediate and unconditional release of the hostages. Guatemala, consistent with the position it has maintained since 1947, calls to resume the search for a peaceful solution to the conflict between Israel and Palestine, which guarantees the existence of a State for the Palestinian people, and which allows them to peacefully coexist with the State of Israel. We should never have gotten to this point. It is up to us to learn from this painful moment, and act accordingly; as others did, for the last 80 years, in this very place. Therefore, it is necessary to discuss and promote reforms to the United Nations system, which make our work more efficient and closer to the people of the world. We must strengthen the impact of the United Nations in its three fundamental pillars: international peace and security, sustainable development and human rights. We reiterate the urgent need to reform the United Nations Security Council. This Body – called to ensure international peace and security – must reﬂect the realities of the 21st century and not the geopolitical structures of the past. That is why we support a more representative structure and democratic, that eliminates the complications implied by the power of veto and reﬂects the current geopolitical reality. In this sense, I want to make my own the phrase of a former Secretary General of the United Nations, Dag Hammarskjöld: “This Organization was not created to take humanity to heaven, but to save humanity from hell.” People of the world: Today multilateralism is in crisis. Its survival, as a joint action of free nations that gives meaning, direction and life to this organization, depends on our having the capacity to profoundly reform it. We can't waste any more time. We must fight for the United Nations to be a community of United Human Beings who care for life in all its forms and everywhere. Only this will guarantee us True Peace, Verapaz. B'antiox. Thank you so much.