 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT  
by President of Kazakhstan  
Kassym -Jomart Tokayev  
at the General Debate of the  
80th session of the UN General Assembly  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 23, 2025  
New York
1 
 
Madam President , 
Mr. Secretary -General , 
Distinguished Delegates , 
 
For eight decades, the U nited Nations  has 
played a pivotal  role in combating humanity’s 
global challenges . 
Over that time, it has led our common 
efforts  on collective security,  nuclear non -
proliferation, peacekeeping , development, 
poverty reduction, sustainability, and human 
rights.  
But we must also face the truth: the world 
around us has changed profoundly  – and, 
unfortunately, not for the better.  
That is why  the United Nations remains 
today a symbol of hope  for millions  around 
the globe . 
This historic meeting  is a unique opportunity 
to recommit ourselves  to the founding 
2 
 
principles and goals  of our universal and truly 
indispensable  Organization . 
However , we cannot turn a blind eye to the 
real crisis of trust  in multilateral institutions.  
Serious v iolations of international law 
have become “ a new normal ity”, which 
undermin es global stability and erodes 
confidence between people s, between political 
leaders, and between states . 
In this challenging time, we all must 
empower the UN  to make it more adjustable  to 
the realities of today’s unpred ictable  world . 
The spirit of mutual understanding and 
eagerness to cooperate must prevail  over 
dangerous warmongering . State leaders 
have a responsibility to move toward making 
peace.  
A failure  of the current  generation of 
leaders to act is not an option because future 
generations will pay  a much  greater price.  
3 
 
In this regard , comprehensive reform of 
the United Nations  is a strategic necessity, not 
a subject  for endless contemplations .  
We need to establish a new group of truly 
dedicated people who will highly professionally 
and without any hesitations make concrete 
proposals for reforming the UN to make it better 
suited to the challenges of today and objectives 
of tomorrow.  
A central pillar of this bold effort to renew the 
UN should be reform of the Security Council . 
Major p owers of Asia, Africa , and Latin 
America  should  be repr esented in the Security 
Council  on the rotational basis.  
In addition, Kazakhstan strongly believes 
that the voices of responsible Middle Powers 
also need to be seriously amplified  in the 
Security Council .  
In fact,  they have already started to play a 
larger positive role  in international relations , 
bring ing balance  and b uilding trust.   
4 
 
They can act as bridge s within the UN 
when  major powers are divided  or failing to 
resolve  pressing  issue s of common concern.  
Above all, a  credible UN for the 21st century 
requires Member States to take concrete 
steps toward durable  peace and  security .   
Otherwise , the UN is doomed  to forever 
mitigat e consequences while  root causes 
forever proliferate .  
We can begin this process  already  today by 
reaffirm ing our  steadfast commitment to the 
Charter of the United Nations .  
The founding principles of sovereignty, 
territorial integrity, and peaceful resolution of 
dispute s must be upheld without exception . 
Selective application of the Charter undermines 
its credibility.  
The world needs a new consensus  
based on trust, inclusiveness and shared 
responsibility.  
5 
 
For example,  the “enemy state ” clauses of 
the Charter, historical remnants o f the Second 
World War , have already been recognized by 
the overwhelming  majority  of the international 
community as obsolete .   
For all these reasons, it is time to have a 
serious conversation about Charter review .  
Today we face an alarming reality : arms 
control  treaties are collapsing , and with them so 
are the foundations of strategic stability . 
Global military spending  in 2024 hit a 
record 2.7 trillion dollars. The global cost of 
violence  reached nearly 20 trillion dollars.  
Therefore,  rebuilding a robust global 
security architecture  should  remain  a top 
priority for the international community.  
We advocate relaunch ing high-level 
dialogue among nuclear powers and stronger 
multilateral action  to drastically reduce the 
looming threat of nuclear weapons.  
6 
 
More widely, w e must begin the hard work of 
getting rid of the militant mindset .  We can do 
so by  tracking closely how much our 
countries invest in peace . 
Kazakhstan is ready  to host a  new 
dialogue on nuclear disarmament  and non -
proliferation . We can focus on  informal 
inclusive exchanges that reinforce the NPT and 
support progress toward the CTBT .  
We also call to advan ce our proposal to 
establish International Agency for Biological 
Safety and Security . 
Kazakhstan  remain s concerned by the 
Ukrainian  Crisis , which continues to seriously 
harm civilians, damage  global trust , and 
undermine international security.   
Nonetheless , bilateral and international 
diplomatic efforts  on this conflict  should contin ue 
along  with political  flexibility  to meet the  long-
term interest s of both states .  
7 
 
T erritorial disputes are never easy to  resolve  
and require mutual  restraint  and 
responsibility for the sake  of future 
generations.   
The psychology of animosity drags all 
involved in conflict s to the abyss  – leaving  
no chance to reach peace.  
The humanitarian crisis  in Gaza  has 
reached a disastrous  scale  that cannot be 
ignored.   
This conflict stems  from a complex historical 
background . We cannot ignor e the root 
cause  of this belli gerence .  
Kazakhstan  calls for full protection of all 
civilians, and  unhindered humanitarian 
access  in strict compliance with  international 
humanitarian law.  
We reaffir m our support  of the  
two-state solution  with the UN playing a 
central role . 
8 
 
Kazakhstan acknowledges diplomatic 
initiatives  aimed at regional reconciliation in 
the Middle East , including  the Arab Peace 
Initiative,  the New York D eclaration, the 
Abraham Accords , and others.  
They demonstrate that  leadership and  
political will can turn division into cooperation 
and shared benefit .  
We also welcome the normaliz ation of 
relations  between  Azerbaijan and Armenia  
under the mediation of the United States ’ 
President .  
It shows that even entrenched conflicts 
can be settled through  diplomacy  and 
common sense . 
Guided by this principle, Kazakhstan 
consistently favors diplomacy over escalation 
and dialogue over force .  
Current geopolitical tensions  sometimes 
tempt  some  leaders to  claim  that a clash of 
civilizations is inevitable .  
9 
 
Yet, these divisions are not fact or fate. They 
are political choices . 
Global public goods such as  science, 
medicine, sports, religion and culture should not 
become subjects of geopolitical division s 
and sanctions .  
These spheres of human activity  bind us 
together under a humanitarian umbrella . 
When  political leaders make irresponsible  
statements or take reckless decisions , 
manipulating  religion and identity for 
political gain , they  in fact seriously damage  the 
trust and goodwill  in striving for peace.  
Political leadership must be rooted in 
mutual understanding  and respect , not 
mutual suspicion and arrogance . 
Tolerance  and wisdom  are the 
foundation of lasting peace  and must be 
upheld through the  rule of law . 
 
Dear colleagues , 
10 
 
 
We observe a growing  fragmentation and 
political bias  of investment flows . 
As a result, global FDI fell to $1.5 trillion  last 
year. 
Kazakhstan  strongly  advocates for  greater 
international  investment cooperation . More 
than 400 billion dollars  have been attracted to 
our economy within 30 years of Independence.  
Our commitment to open market 
principles is absolutely firm  and will remain a 
cornerstone of our state policy . 
Located in the very center of Eurasia, 
Kazakhstan is poised  to play a crucial  role as a 
logistics hub , handling  80% of all overland 
transit  between Asia and Europe.  
We are investing  tens of billions of dollars in  
our transport and transit  infrastructure , 
including  the Belt and Road Initiative, the North -
South and the  Trans -Caspian  transit c orrido rs.   
11 
 
Kazakhstan  will continue to develop 
regional  supply chains  that are the heart  of 
the emerging global transport network . 
By 2029, we plan to build 5 thousand  
kilometers  of new railway lines . 
Kazakhstan has made  the Sustainable 
Development  Goals  a core pillar of  its 
national  agenda , integrating their targets into 
state planning  and budgeting . 
With the support of the UN Secretary -
General  and partner -states , Kazakhstan now 
hosts  the new United Nations  Regional 
Centre for SDGs for Central Asia and 
Afghanistan  in Almaty.  
Today , Central Asia  is demonstrating a 
renewed sense of unity  and mutual trust . It is 
emerging as a  proactive contributor to 
international peace and  progress.  
The “Central Asian Five ” are strengthening  
cooperation, proving  that regional solidarity  
12 
 
can be a powerful force for development  and 
security . 
This has enabled  our region to engage  key 
global partners in the  unique “Central Asia 
Plus” dialogue format . 
Kazakhstan believes that inclusive 
development in Afghanistan  is a basis  for long -
term regional peace and stability . 
We continue to support the Afghan 
people  through humanitarian assistance and  
cooperation in  trade, food security, 
infrastructure and transport connectivity.  
Distinguished delegates , 
 
Last year was the hottest year in human 
history  and Central Asia is warming at twice 
the global rate .  
The melting of glaciers in the Alatau  
mountains  is accelerating, multiplying threats 
to water and food security for millions.  
13 
 
Kazakhstan  has drawn  profound lessons 
from t he tragedy of  the Aral Sea . Thanks to our 
consistent efforts , including at the international 
level,  we succeeded in  preserving  the 
northern part of the sea .  
As the current chair of the International 
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea , Kazakhstan will 
continue to  play a proactive role  in this  
common priority . 
Meanwhile, t he Caspian Sea  is rapidly 
shrinking .  It is n o longer just a regional concern, 
it is a global warning signal . 
Therefore , we call for  urgent steps  to 
preserve  the Caspian water resources  with 
our partners across the region and the wide r 
international community . 
Last year , Kazakhstan co -organized  the 
One Water Summit  with France, Saudi Arabia 
and the World Bank.  
14 
 
Looking forward, stronger coordination, 
investments, and sustainable solutions are 
urgently needed to prevent future water crises.  
T o help advance this agenda, Kazakhstan 
will host a Regional Ecological Summit  in 
Astana in April next year, to be convened in 
partnership with the United Nations and other 
international organizations.  
As part of our broader environmental 
commitment, Kazakhstan is implementing  
a nationwide “ Clean Kazakhstan ” campaign . 
This national movement mobilizes millions 
of volunteers  in clean -up actions, waste 
reduction, and eco -education.  
At the initiative of Kazakhstan, the UN 
declared 2026 the International Year of 
Volunteers for Sustainable Development . 
We invite all Member States to collaborate on 
this important endeavor.    
In this spirit, I propose that the General 
Assembly adopt a resolution proclaiming April  
15 
 
22 as the International Day of Greening the 
Planet . 
 
Dear friends , 
 
Kazakhstan views  Artificial Intelligence  
not as one more technological advancement, 
but as a major breakthrough that can be a 
true engine of human progress .  
Yet as AI accelerates , so do the related 
risks – specifically deepening technological, 
economic and geopolitical divides . 
At the same time, we should not let ethical 
norms fall behind this rapid evolution.  
Pressing questions of fairness, 
accountability, and individual rights must be 
addressed with clarity and urgency.  
We must act collectively  to ensure that 
every country can benefit from AI.  
16 
 
Kazakhstan welcomes the establishment 
under UN auspices of the Global Dialogue on 
AI Governance .  
We stand  ready to actively contribute  to 
this platform  to help ensure that AI remains 
safe, inclusive and human -centered.  
In Kazakhstan,  artificial Intelligence  will be 
integrated across all sectors of economy and 
public services.  
The basic infrastructure to deliver this plan is 
being built, and our bright  young people  are 
getting  ready to turn this vision into reality.  
Our strategic goal is  to transform 
Kazakhstan into a fully digital power within 
the next three years.  
Large -scale digitalization and widespread 
use of AI have become a national priority in 
Kazakhstan . 
E-government is an important pillar of our 
national development strategy.   
17 
 
Around  90% of public services  are already 
digitalized . 
Kazakhstan has recently  launch ed its 
fastest national supercomputer  ever. 
But AI and automation  are expected to 
threaten  jobs in many  countries.  
That is why  digital progress must go hand -
in-hand with professional education . 
Therefore, Kazakhstan believes it is 
imperative not just to increase employment but 
to valorize the technical professions .  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen ,  
 
Amid global turbulence , Kazakhstan  is 
pursuing a bold national renewal  to build  a truly 
Just and Fair State .  
Over the last  three years, we have carried 
out large-scale political and economic 
reforms that are unprecedented in our part 
of the world . 
18 
 
Through a national referendum, we 
introduced a  single seven -year presidential 
term, thereby strengthe ning democratic 
accountability . 
We remain  committed to the formula of 
strong President , influential Parliament , and 
accountable Government . 
Guided by  strong wish to modernize 
Kazakhstan , I have proposed  a single -chamber  
Parliament for a national referendum  to 
consider . 
Our objective is to continuously  embrace  
the political system  to make  it more  
transparent , effective  and reflective of people ’s 
aspirations.  
At the hear t of these  reforms lies a clear  
principle : Law and Order must prevail . 
We believe that only  a governance rooted 
in common -sense  and the rule of law  can 
19 
 
ensure public order and protect the rights of  all 
citizens .  
It creates good conditions for international 
investment , trade cooperation, and more 
broadly , the dynamic development of our 
country.  
The interests of law -abiding people and 
decent citizens must always come first , 
maintained through justice, accountability, and 
mutual respect.  
Kazakhstan ’s economy  is show ing clear 
signs of sustainability and resilience.  
This year, economic growth is expected to 
exceed 6% , underscoring  the sustainability  of 
our economy as the largest in the region . 
But we are not complacen t. We will continue 
our efforts to ensure a  long-term growth.  
Kazakhstan’s energy strategy  is based on 
four pillars: oil and gas , coal, uranium , and 
critical minerals . These precious assets are 
the basis of reliable energy partnerships.  
20 
 
Agriculture is another driver of our 
development with huge potential for global 
markets . 
Kazakhstan’s grain export capacity has 
amounted to  12 (twelve) million tons , 
reaching a great number of international 
markets, creating new opportunities for trade 
expansion using enhanced transport 
connectivity.  
We will continue our cooperation with all major 
international partners and regional stakeholders to 
further diversify our  external trade and  
economy , making it more inclusive and resilient.  
 
Excellencies , 
 
We will remain firmly on this path – 
deepening governance reforms at home  
while supporting  global governance abroad . 
Kazakhstan will continue to serve as a 
bridge -builder  and peace -maker . It will also 
21 
 
continue to choose balance over domination, 
cooperation over confrontation , and peace over 
war. 
We stand  ready – in cooperation with others 
in the international community  – to renew the 
promise of the United Nations  as a beacon of 
peace , justice,  and cooperation.  
Thank you ! 