1 
 
 
Statement by H.E. Mr. Sadyr Zhaparov, the President of the  
Kyrgyz Republic, at the General Debate of the 80th session of  
the United Nations General Assembly  
(23 September, 2025, New York)  
 
Ms. President , 
 
Mr. Secretary -General , 
 
Distinguished heads of delegations , ladies and gentlemen ,  
 
 
First of all, I would like to sincerely congratulate Ms. Annalena 
Baerbock on her election as President of the 80th session of the U nited 
Nations  General Assembly and wish her success in her work.   
This year, we are celebrating the 80th anniversary of the United 
Nations, a unique organization that has been protecting peace, security 
and development on earth for almost a century.  
Despite the many conflicts over the past 80 years, thankfully, the world 
has not faced a third world war.  
Of course, the United Nations has been instrumental in avoiding such 
a catastrophe.  
The organization has not only remained a platform for international 
dialogue, but has also played a special role in preventing global conflicts.  
Today, regionalism trends are gaining strength in world politics.  
Prices are rising, liquidity is tight, and the economy is in a war of 
sanctions.  
The threat of terrorism and extremism is affecting all countries .  
Despite the current challenges, the United Nations remains the only 
universal organization with moral authority and institutional capacity .  
 
2 Today, Kyrgyzstan is proud of its political stability and ongoing socio -
economic growth.  
These achievements did not come easily to us.  
The price of achieving freedom and independence was very high for 
us. 
But I can say one thing with certainty: Kyrgyzstan has established itself 
as a state!  
This achievement allows us to set great goals for the future.  
International organizations, including the United Nations, recognize 
Kyrgyzstan as one of the freest and most stable countries on the Eurasian 
continent, with a strong civil society . 
A large -scale and uncompromising fight against corruption and crime 
is a priority of state policy in Kyrgyzstan!  
Today, we face the task of political renewal and economic development 
in line with the demands of the future . 
We set ourselves the task of improving the investment climate, building 
an information society, as well as a fair and transparent state 
administration.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
 
Every year, the leaders of all the countries of the world gather in New 
York to remind themselves and each other of the great mission for which 
the Organization was created.  
I am also here in New York with this mission.  
Today, my diplomats have prepared a polite text, taking into account 
the international diplomatic situation.  
But this year, I decided that I will not be a diplomat on this high 
podium .  
This year, I want to speak from this rostrum not only as a head of 
state, but also as an ordinary person, an ordinary citizen of my country, 
expressing his true opinion and thoughts on international events taking 
place in the world.  
 
 
3 This year is my fourth time delivering a speech at the UN General 
Assembly.  
For three years in a row, I have come here and spoken pleasant, 
beautiful words.  
Today, I have decided to speak openly and directly about the problems 
that trouble the hearts of millions of people.  
In different parts of the world - in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Asia - 
new armed conflicts and wars are breaking out.  
Millions of people are losing their homes, forced to leave their native 
lands, Millions are becoming victims.  
Who suffers the most? First of all - ordinary people!  
We cannot turn a blind eye to the suffering of many peoples: Palestine, 
Ukraine, Sudan, Syria and others, where military actions continue, civilians 
are killed, human rights are violated.  
The world community, applying double standards, by prioritiz ing these 
conflicts as " this is more important, and that is less important ", taking into 
account its  selfish geopolitical interests.  
The conflict in Ukraine has been going on for almost four years, people 
are dying and fleeing the country.  
We support the efforts of US President Donald Trump and Russian 
President Vladimir Putin to find solutions for a peaceful settlement of the 
conflict in Ukraine.  
We are interested in this!  
Because we are also suffering from the consequences of the Russian -
Ukrainian conflict.  
Unilateral sanctions have a negative impact on us, a country that is 
just getting back on its feet.  
Kyrgyzstan is making every effort to independently strengthen its 
economy.  
Therefore, we regard unjustified sanctions as interference in the 
internal affairs of the country and as pressure that hinders the development 
of our still emerging economy.  
 
4 I have always said and I repeat once again: Kyrgyzstan has strictly 
fulfilled and will fulfill its international obligations.  
However, we cannot sacrifice the interests of our citizens and the 
economic development of the country!  
The sanctions imposed on Kyrgyzstan are based on false information 
spread by certain non -governmental organizations and malicious c itizens.  
We are ready to accept independent international audits to thoroughly 
check the activities of Kyrgyz banks.  
In 2024, the countries of the European Union carried out trade with 
Russia in the amount of 141 billion dollars, of which 36 billion were imports 
from Russia.  
And Great Britain, which imposed sanctions against two of our banks, 
in the same year conducted trade with Russia in the amount of 2.2 billion 
dollars.  
Frankly speaking, someone reserves the opportunity to cooperate with 
Russia, defending their own interests, but forbids others to do so.  
What can you call it? There is a saying: "Before you demand 
something from others, be an example yourself." You ask us  not to 
cooperate with Russia, but you yourself are actively developing trade and 
economic ties with it.  
We have many more economic relations with Russia than you do.  
Therefore, in economic terms, we cannot refuse to cooperate with 
Russia.  
 
We do not seek confrontation with others. We cooperate with almost 
the whole  world  and pursu e a multi -vector policy.  
For example, we sell gold worth 1 billion dollars annually to England . 
My primary duty as the President of the country is to ensure the 
security of my citizens and the country, as well as to improve their 
economic situation.    
We are against the politicization of economic cooperation and trade.  
5 Therefore, we demand the lifting of sanctions imposed on our two 
banks.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
 
The UN Secretary General has already described the Gaza Strip as a 
"graveyard for thousands of children"!  
What else is needed to stop the war and the horrific events in Gaza?  
We must stand in solidarity with the Palestinian people, who are 
suffer ing enormous losses as a result of the inhuman conflict in the Gaza 
Strip.  
We must not remain indifferent to the unbearable tragedy happening 
before the eyes of the whole world.  
We demand that the genocide against the Palestinians be stopped and 
that an international judicial investigation by the International Court of 
Justice be launched!  
My country has always strongly condemned violence and terrorism in 
all its manifestations, including the terrorist attacks on Israel on October 7, 
2023.  
Such terrorists must be severely punished.  
However, there are methods and ways to combat terrorism and 
eliminate terrorists.  
These methods should be used.  
Millions of ordinary citizens should not die because of the actions of 
such terrorists.  
Why are we allowing hun dreds of thousands of civilians and  innocent 
children, to be killed?  
The only way to establish lasting peace is to implem ent the principle of 
"Two State solution for Two Peoples".  
Palestine must gain independence based on the 1967 borders.  
6 We also condemn the recent missile attacks on Qatar and Iran, as 
these attacks are an attack on the sovereignty of an independent country, 
threaten regional stability and security, and violate international law.  
The fight against terrorism and threats in Gaza, Iran, Lebanon, and 
other regions must be proportionate to their scale and nature, and innocent 
civilians, women, and children must not be harmed or sacrificed.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
 
As a neighboring country, Kyrgyzstan considers it important in the 
current difficult conditions to provide comprehensive support to the Afghan 
people,  and to integrat e the Afghan economy into regional and global 
economic processes.  
Isolating Afghanistan at the international level and depriving it of 
foreign aid is wrong. It is unfair.  
We believe that the use of financial instruments for geopolitical and 
ideological gain to exacerbate the humanitarian crisis is an expression of 
injustice and inhumanity.  
Therefore, we are convinced that the assets of Afghanistan frozen by 
Western countries in the amount of over 9 billion US dollars should be 
returned to the Afghan people as soon as possible.  
These funds could help restore infrastructure, expand access to loans 
through local banks, develop agriculture and create new opportunities for 
millions of people living in poverty.  
You are using these resources and benefiting from them.  
This is a disgrace for you.  
According to the United Nations, in 2025, 15 million people in 
Afghanistan will face hunger, and 24 million will need humanitarian 
assistance.  
As we all know , in early September, more than 2,000 of our Afghan 
people died as a result of an earthquake.  
7 Unfortunately, due to a lack of financial resources and weak 
infrastructure, it was not possible to provide timely assistance to the 
victims.  
We call on Western leaders to immediately return these assets for the 
sake of the future of the Afghan people.   
If you want the Afghan people to get out of poverty and hunger as 
soon as possible, return the ir assets without delay.  
Only then will your words about human rights and interstate obligations 
correspond to your actions!  
 
Dear participants,  
 
Today's challenges in African countries - from conflicts to food 
insecurity - require not sympathy in words, but solidarity in actions.  
Africa is 54 countries with a population of over 1.5 billion people, it is 
the second largest continent after Eurasia.  
Africa has huge reserves of resources, and we are confident that in the 
near future Africa's role in the global economy and international politics will 
increase several times.  
Therefore, Africa's colossal natural resources should serve the 
accelerated development of the continent itself and the satisfaction of its 
own interests.  
 
It is necessary to strengthen the work of UN peacekeeping.  
Since gaining independence in the early 1990s, my country has been 
sending its own peacekeepers as part of UN missions.  
This once again proves that we sincerely want to contribute to 
strengthening peace and security in the world.  
The contribution of a state should not be determined by its size, but by 
the depth of its commitment and sincere desire for peace and solidarity.  
We support the strengthening of international treaties, including the 
Treaty on the Non -Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.  
8 We must educate the young generation to perceive a world without 
nuclear weapons!  
It is important to raise awareness of the younger generation about the 
devastating consequences of the use of weapons of mass destruction.  
The International Day for Disarmament and Non -Proliferation 
Awareness,  initiated by the Kyrgyz side and supported by UN member 
states, is an excellent platform for the implementation of this concept.  
Kyrgyzstan is one of the initiators and depository of the Treaty on a 
Nuclear -Weapon -Free Zone in Central Asia.   
We have acceded to all fundamental international documents on 
disarmament and non -proliferation, including the Treaty on the Non -
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear -Test-
Ban Treaty.  
 
In accordance with the principle of consistency, this year the Kyrgyz 
Republic made a political decision to sign the Treaty on the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons.  
We are firmly convinced that our planet should exist without nuclear 
weapons - this invention of mankind should be used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes!  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
For sustainable development and regional integration, the countries of 
Central Asia need equal dialogue and active interaction.  
Despite the complex historical and geographical background, 
Kyrgyzstan has peacefully resolved its border issues with neighboring 
countries, in particular with Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.  
This process was accompanied by lengthy negotiations at a high level, 
at the expert level, and was resolved taking into account respect for the 
interests of all parties.  
I can confidently say that today the borders between Kyrgyzstan, 
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan are the borders of friendship, trade and 
cooperation.  
9 This experience confirms: peace is possible where there is political 
will, respect and dialogue, which allowed us to resolve all existing 
contradictions and get on the path of development.  
Kyrgyzstan is ready to share its experience in resolving complex 
issues with the world community.  
Let's use the more than 3 trillion dollars that are spent annually on 
weapons around the world to improve people's lives, eliminate hunger, 
protect our environment and clean the air.  
After all, there are no borders for breathing air.  
We all breathe the same air.  
Therefore, I would like to invite you to live with the competition of 
which country's nature, which country's air is clean, not with the competition 
of whose weapon is stronger.  
 
Dear friends,  
 
Climate change is a reality that we are witnessing today.  
We are facing threats of drought, melting glaciers, ecosystem and 
biodiversity changes.  
Kyrgyzstan is a mountainous country that is particularly vulnerable to 
these changes.  
We are already experiencing a decline in water resources, threats to 
agriculture and biodiversity.  
Although Kyrgyzstan is landlocked, it actively participates in 
international environmental initiatives and can play a significant role in 
supporting agreements aimed at protecting global ecosystems.  
The Kyrgyz Republic has been advocating for the recognition of the 
interconnectedness of natural systems, which are two poles of one system 
- “from mountains to oceans”.  
After all, the future of the oceans begins at the peaks.  
10 In this context, we ratified  the Agreement on Marine Biodiversity 
(BBNJ)  and joined the group of the first 60+ countries that acceded to it.  
Rivers that support marine and coastal ecosystems originate in the 
mountains.  
Therefore, the protection of mountain ecosystems and the sustainable 
management of the seas are interconnected.  
Now the country is preparing the Second Bishkek+25 Summit, 
scheduled for 2027, as a central platform for states, international 
organizations and experts on sustainable development of mountain  areas.  
We invite all of you to actively participate in this event.  
 
Dear friends,  
 
As former  UN Secretary -General Dag Hammarskjöld once said: "The 
UN was not created to take humanity to heaven, but rather to save 
humanity from hell."  
Today, these words are more relevant than ever. The organization was 
born from the horrors of war, but is alive thanks to the belief in cooperation, 
dialogue and respect.  
Today, more than ever, it is important to preserve and develop the 
multilateral system as a shield against anarchy and unilateral decisions.  
The need to create new international mechanisms adequate to 
contemporary challenges and threats has matured.  
Our Organization needs change, and this is already a requirement of 
current realities.   
In this context, we support the efforts of the Secretary -General to 
reform the UN system under t he "UN-80 initiative ". 
It is also time to improve and reform the work of the UN Security 
Council.  
Currently, 15 members of the UN Security Council actually decide the 
fate of all states in the world.  
The issues of war and peace, security and stability depend on their 
achievement of a consolidated position.  
11 Moreover, the five permanent members of the Security Council always 
can block any decision.  
Kyrgyzstan advocates for the adoption of necessary measures to 
improve the UN Security Council, which will take into account the interests 
of the vast majority of states.  
In this regard, it is very important to reach a prompt and compromise 
solution on all issues of reforming the UN Security Council.  
This reform should be based on the principles of universality, broad 
geographical representation and have broad support from UN member 
states.  
Kyrgyzstan considers it legitimate and fair to expand the right of 
African states to membership in the Security Council and efforts to 
eliminate the historical imbalance.  
More than 60 member states, including Kyrgyzstan, have never been 
elected to the Security Council, while some countries have been elected 
five or six times.  
 
Dear members of the delegation,  
 
Kyrgyzstan strives to make its feasible contribution to ensuring peace, 
global security and sustainable development.  
In order to draw  the attention of the UN and the world to the problem s 
of small states, Kyrgyzstan has put forward its candidacy for non -
permanent membership in the UN Security Council for the period 2027 -
2028.  
Supporting countries that have not previously been elected to the 
Security Council will emphasize the equality of UN Member States, 
enhance the organization’s prestige and contribute to strengthening trust in 
it. 
We believe in the principle of justice, and I ask UN Member States to 
support us in the elections to be held in June next year.  
Every state should have the opportunity to become a member of the 
Security Council and contribute to maintaining peace and security in the 
world.  
12 I can say with confidence that Kyrgyzstan is one of the states with the 
experience to put forward significant issues in the Security Council.  
We firmly adhere to international law, justice, the protection of human 
rights, and support a multilateral system based on mutual respect, balance 
of interests, and responsibility for future generations.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
The challenges of our time concern us all, and our responses to them 
must be united.  
 
Our words must match our actions.  
 
We cannot afford inaction.  
 
The world demands action . 
 
The future of our planet is our shared responsibility.  
 
Thank you for your attention!  
 