1 
  
 
Statement of the President of the Republic of Kiribati to the United Nations at its 
80th Session to be delivered on September 24, 2024  
Headquarters of the United Nations in New York.  
 
 
President of the General Assembly  
Head of States and Governments  
Secretary General of the United Nations,  
Excellencies,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  

2 
 In His Holy Name and on behalf of the Government and People of Kiribati I extend our 
warm greeting s to you all : Kam na bane ni mauri  
 
I am honoured  to warmly congratulate you, Madam President , on your election to preside 
over this historic 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly  and I wish you 
every success as you guide these important deliberations.    
 
Madam President, we commend  your theme: “Better Together: 80 Years and More for 
Peace, Development, and Human Rights ”, remind ing us of the enduring importance of 
multilateral cooperation in addressing global challenges. For Kiribati, it underscores the 
value of working collectively to advance peace, safeguard human rights, and promote 
sustainable development.  
3 
 Your Excellencies,  
Kiribati welcomes the initiative of the Secretary General to reform the United Nations for 
the challenges and realities of the 21st century . Importantly , it respon ds to members’  
needs, especially Small Island Developing States (SIDs) and the Least Developed 
Countries (LDCs) . These countries are faced with unique and special circumstances that 
require  targeted assistance and support from the U N. The Secretary -General’s UN80 
Initiative is a  crucial  step toward a more effective U N. In this context, we encourage 
reforms that remove duplication, improve efficiency , and ensure that mandates most vital 
to vulnerable nations such as climate action, sustainable development, and resilience are 
protected and enhanced.  
 
4 
 Kiribati is proud that, since joining the U N, we have been contributing  in our own way to 
its mandates and initiatives.  On international peace and security, Kiribati has actively 
supported the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, particularly in the 
implementation of Articles 6 and 7, efforts which we jointly coordinate with Kazakhstan. 
We fully support the United Nations’ push for a world free of nuclear weapons and are 
committed to addressing the man-made disasters like dumping of nuclear waste, radio 
water discharges, traversing of nuclear -powered submarines and testing that pose grave 
risks to our ocean’s fragile health.   
 
Advocating for a nuclear -free ocean and world should be backed by our commitment to 
peace and security. Kiribati has strengthened governance in the capital and is now 
5 
 working with outer islands to improve accountability, develop initiatives, manage assets, 
and enhance customer service. These efforts are essential for peace and security.  
 
Aligned with our KV20 Roadmap to transform Kiribati into a healthy, wealthy, and peaceful 
nation, police officers support UN peacekeeping missions. Kiribati actively engages in 
social and cultural initiatives for peaceful living. Gospel Day, now celebrated  across 
Kiribati, unites faith -based groups to worship together, fostering respect, unity, and peace. 
We hope this approach promotes religious tolerance worldwide, making it a better place 
to live.   
    
Peace, security, and respect for the UN Charter are essential for sustainable 
development. Kiribati is committed to the SDGs, emphasizing SIDS' unique 
6 
 circumstances. Along with other SIDS in the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS 
(ABAS), we aim for resilient prosperity through technological and digital solutions. These 
innovations are vital to overcoming challenges from geographical isolation and limite d 
scale. While Kiribati has technological constraints, we see digital solutions as key to 
enhancing public services, education, commerce, and climate resilience.   
 
Your Excellencies,  
Kiribati faces climate challenges but remains resilient. While some narratives claim our 
islands are sinking, we have traditional and modern strategies to adapt and thrive. Our 
efforts, aligned with international climate goals, focus on building resilience , protecting 
livelihoods, and preserving our culture. We urge global action to limit warming to 1.5°C 
and support frontline states through the Loss and Damage Fund.   
7 
 We welcome and commend the International Court of Justice in its landmark decision 
giving us firm hope and assurance that Kiribati and other vulnerable countries will 
continue to exist  in light of climate change impacts .  This milestone demonstrates what 
the Blue Pacific can successfully achieve collectively and, that is to secure the full legal 
certainty and permanence of our maritime zones, irrespective of the impacts of climate 
change.   
The Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI) is particularly important for Kiribati, as it 
captures the combined effects of economic, social and environmental vulnerabilities that 
are not fully reflected in income -based measures alone. By incorporating t he MVI into 
development planning and international support, SIDS like Kiribati can better access 
8 
 resources, build resilience and implement effective strategies to achieve sustainable 
development, despite our structural limitations.   
 
Kiribati's ocean is vital for its identity, economy, and food security. Protecting marine life, 
fighting illegal fishing, and supporting the BBNJ Agreement are key to sustaining 
livelihoods and ecosystems. IUU fishing causes over $600 million annual loss, a moral 
and economic injustice that could fund universal child health care. Guided by the 2050 
Strategy for the Blue Pacific and recent UN Ocean Conference outcomes, Kiribati 
believes these issues can be addressed through strong, multilateral ocean governa nce 
based on UN principles.   
 
 
9 
 Your Excellencies,  
As part of Kiribati’s efforts to support the Global Ocean commitments to protect  and 
sustainably manage  the marine resources we have committed to increase the value of 
our tuna and maximise economic returns and at the same time ensure that this resource 
is protected for our future generations through the Part ies to the Nauru Agreement or 
PNA.  
 
Access to sustainable and renewable energy is fundamental to advancing development 
and resilience in Kiribati , Small Islands States  and Pacific Islands Forum family at large.    
Kiribati is investing in clean energy technologies  such as solar lights at household levels 
to reduce our dependence on imported fossil fuels .  We call for enhanced international 
10 
 cooperation and financing to accelerate the transition to sustainable energy systems that 
are accessible, affordable, and climate resilient.  
 
Your Excellencies,  
The role of education, youth, and women in building resilient communities is vital. 
Investing in quality education, promoting gender equality, and empowering young people 
are key to sustainable development, innovation, and social cohesion. We support 
initiatives that foster youth leadership and women's full participation in economic, political, 
and social spheres. Sports, culture, and traditional knowledge further boost community 
resilience, health, and belonging, supporting peaceful, sustainable societies.  Healthcare 
in Kiribati faces challenges from the dispersed islands. To improve, the government will 
11 
 introduce sea ambulances and advanced medical services to enhance capacity and 
reduce the need for overseas referrals.   
 
Your Excellencies,  
Equitable and predictable development financing is vital for Kiribati’s future. Reforming 
the international financial system, improving access to concessional finance, data 
sustainability, and bridging the digital divide are key to enabling states to meet 
development goals. The Blue Pacific recognizes the challenge of accessing climate 
financing and supports the establishment of the Pacific Resilience Facility, led and owned 
by members, with $162 million pledged to fund it. Kiribati highlights the importanc e of the 
Doha Programme of Action for Least Developed Countries, which mobilizes international 
support for the most vulnerable. We await the UN Financing for Development Conference, 
12 
 hoping it provides concrete solutions to improve access to finance for those in need. 
These efforts are crucial for LDCs like Kiribati to build resilience and promote sustainable 
development.  
 
Kiribati reaffirms its belief in the fundamental principles of multilateralism as the 
cornerstone for addressing global challenges collectively. By embracing cooperation, 
solidarity, and multilateral engagement, we can shape a future in which all nations, 
particularly the most vulnerable, can thrive and prosper.  
 
In this endeavor, we draw inspiration from the wisdom of our fore -fathers , who taught us 
that by working hard in resilience and peace, we can secure enough to prosper.  This 
enduring principle guides Kiribati’s approach to sustainable development, resilience, and 
13 
 multilateral engagement, reminding us that collective effort and peaceful collaboration are 
the foundations of lasting progress.  
 
Allow me to close by bestowing upon the United Nations and  all its members and all its 
staff our traditional blessings of Te Mauri, Te Raoi ao Te Tabomoa meaning Abundant 
Health, Peace and Prosperity.  
 
I thank you.  Kam bati n raba  