 
1 1 
Address By His Excellency Joseph Nyuma Boakai, Sr . 
President of the Republic of Liberia  
Delivered at the General Debate of the 80th Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly, New York  
 
Theme: “Better Together: 80 Years and More for Peace, 
Development, and Human Rights”  
 
Madam President;  
 
Mr. Secretary -General;  
 
Excellencies;  
 
Distinguished Delegates:  
 
I am honored to address this 80th session of the United Nations 
General Assembly on behalf of the people of Liberia. Eight decades 
after its founding, in which Liberia was involved, our country is proud 
that the United Nations remains  the most critical  multilateral platform 
for international cooperation and collective action. The UN continues 
to embody the best framework of humanity for peace, justice, security, 
dignity, and shared prosperity.  
 
Madam President:  
Please accept the congratulations from the Liberian delegation on your 
assumption of the esteemed office of President of the 80th Session of 
the General Assembly. We trust in your leadership to guide the affairs 
of this august body. We also extend our comm endation to your 
predecessor for his stewardship of the 79th session  and are grateful to 
the Secretary -General  for his leadership.  
 
Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates:  
Please accept the gratitude of the Liberian Government and people for 
the overwhelming trust demonstrated by the General Assembly 
members in electing Liberia to serve on the  Non-permanent seat of the 
United Nations  Security Council for the 2026 -2027 term. This marks 
Liberia’s first full tenure on the UN Security Council, eighty years after 
the country signed the charter in the Herbst Theatre auditorium in San 
Francisco.  
 
 
2 2 
While the nameplate during this two -year term will read “Liberia”, the 
seat, however, belongs  to Africa. We are committed to ensuring that 
Liberia’s contributions to the Security Council’s discussions and 
decisions are shaped by our hard -earned experiences in conflict 
resolution, as well as our successes in peacebuilding, democratic 
reform, political transiti on, and governance.  
 
Additionally, the collective experiences of the continent will be taken 
into consideration. Liberia looks forward to advocating for Africa’s fair 
representation on the UN Security Council, which can only be achieved 
through permanent representation as a ke y part of the UN Security 
Council reform agenda.  
 
Excellencies:  
When the UN was founded in 1945, nations came together in the belief 
that peace could only be secured through cooperation. After two world 
wars, it became a widely held conviction that nations are stronger 
when united than when divided . Eighty years later, that conviction is 
being tested like never before. From wars and displacements to 
terrorism, threats to technological advances, climate change, and 
widening inequalities,  today, our world faces challenges that no 
country can solve alone. At the same time, and paradoxically, when 
the world needs to strengthen multilateralism, its credibility and 
efficacy are being questioned.  
 
As one of only four African countries to sign the Charter of the United 
Nations, Liberia feels morally obligated to call for a renewal —rather 
than a reversal — of multilateralism. Reversal of multilateralism is not 
an option for a just and peaceful world. W e call for greater inclusion, 
effectiveness, and respect for international law, recognizing that the 
credibility of the  United Nations depends on our ability to act together 
in the service of humanity, rather than apart in the pursuit of narrow 
interests.  
 
Madam President:  
Wars in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa remind us that peace is 
often fragile and must be constantly defended. Therefore, as in 1945, 
Liberia once again reaffirms its commitment to dialogue, diplomacy, 
and the peaceful resolution of disputes.  
 
 
3 3 
In this spirit, Liberia supports all credible mediation efforts aimed at 
resolving the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, as well as the 
Israeli -Palestinian conflict. Liberia stands on the common African 
position for the realization of the two -state solu tion, where Israelis and 
Palestinians can live side by side in peace and security, in accordance 
with international law and relevant UN Resolutions.  
 
We call on the international community to act together and decisively 
to protect civilians, hold perpetrators of atrocities accountable, and 
strengthen mediation efforts. Rising from the ruins of civil war, Liberia 
knows all too well the human cost of conflict and the importance of 
peace. Since 2003, Liberia has experienced three peaceful and orderly 
democratic transitions, eac h marked by smooth transfers of power, 
making our nation safer, more stable, and more secure after over thirty 
years of unrest, instability, and destruction. Liberians have also worked 
hard to achieve this through multilateral cooperation, with support 
from ECOWAS, the African Union, and the United Nations.  
 
Excellencies, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen:  
For Liberia, climate change is not a distant threat but a present reality. 
Rising seas are eroding our coasts, while storms and heavy rains 
devastate communities, threaten lives and livelihoods, and exacerbate  
food insecurity.  
 
Yet we are acting. We are carrying out coastal defense projects, 
developing climate information systems for early warning systems, 
finalizing our carbon market policies, and advancing a blue economy 
strategy.  
 
But our efforts alone are not enough. We urge urgent implementation 
of the Paris Agreement, full capitalization of the Loss and Damage 
Fund, and greater global investment in adaptation and mitigation . 
Above all, we call for Climate Justice —those who contribute the least 
to this crisis should not be forced to suffer the most.  
 
Madam President, Excellencies:  
Too many developing nations spend more on debt servicing than on 
health or education. The current international financial architecture is 
unresponsive to this reality, making it not only outdated, but also 
unjust and defiant of the objectives of shared pro sperity and 
development, the pursuit of which the United Nations was also created.  
 
 
4 4 
Liberia, therefore, joins the Global South in calling for urgent reforms 
to the international financial architecture to ensure fair representation, 
a new approach to debt servicing, and financing that supports 
sustainable development. Shared prosperity req uires a system that 
truly leaves no nation behind.  
 
Excellencies, distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
At home, inclusive development remains our top priority. To this end, 
our government has launched the ARREST Agenda for Inclusive 
Development, which focuses on:  
• Agriculture and Food Security  
• Roads and Infrastructure  
• Rule of Law and Good Governance  
• Education and Skills Development  
• Sanitation and Health  
• Technology and Innovation  
The Arrest Agenda aligns with our National Vision 2030, which aims 
to transform Liberia into a lower -middle -income country and lay the 
foundation for a capable state by 2030. Through this agenda, we are 
committed to improving livelihoods, reducing inequality, and ensuring 
that every Liberian benefits from the dividends of peace and 
development.  
We are taking tangible steps to improve governance. By implementing 
accountability and anti -corruption measures , such as  asset 
declarations, we are strengthening institutional capacity to promote 
integrity, transparency, and improved public service delivery.  
Liberia has endured some of the darkest chapters of human suffering, 
having experienced one of the most brutal civil conflicts in recent 
history. Over the past two decades, we have remained firmly on the 
path of recovery —working to heal our nation and rebu ild from the 
painful legacy of war.  
My government has taken deliberate and meaningful steps toward 
national reconciliation. These include honoring the memory of the 
victims, supporting initiatives for memorialization, and upholding our 
commitment to justic e and the rule of law.  
 
While we recognize that these efforts are complex and challenging, 
 
5 5 
they are essential steps toward achieving lasting peace and genuine  
national healing.  
 
May I now take the opportunity to renew my government's request for 
international support and assistance in establishing a War and 
Economic Crimes Court, which will  further the Liberian people’s 
aspiration for national healing and reconciliation through justice.  
 
Madam President:  
For the United Nations to remain relevant and practical , it must adapt. 
Liberia, therefore, supports the Pact for the Future and the Global 
Digital Compact. We also call for a UN that's more responsive and 
reflective of today’s world. Using outdated 1945 solutions to tackle 
2025 challenges is neither reasonabl e nor realistic.  
 
Regarding the Sustainable Development Goals, we agree that our 
collective progress is too slow. However, reaching the SDG targets 
remains as vital as ever. We, therefore, urge that the timely 
achievement of the SDGs be treated as a global emergency. 
Conseq uently, Liberia will submit its next Voluntary National Review in 
2026, committing to accelerate the implementation of the global goals 
in line with the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and ECOWAS’ Vision 2050.  
 
Finally, Excellencies:  
The theme of this session , “Better Together, ” aptly captures both the 
spirit and the urgency of our time. The challenges before us are 
immense. So, too, must be our collective capacity to overcome them.  
 
Liberia pledges to remain a bridge to peace, a development partner , 
and a defender of human rights.  
 
Over the next 80 years, we will continue to honor  the promise of 1945  
by renewing our commitment to a world where peace is just, 
development is inclusive, and dignity is universal.  
 
Thank you.  