- 1 - SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY ANDRY RAJOELINA PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR ON THE OCCASION OF THE 80TH UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York City, September 24, 2025 Madam President of the 80th United Nations General Assembly, Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, Excellencies Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government, Honorable Assembly, Ladies and Gentlemen, Tompokolahy sy Tompokovavy, It is with sincere emotion that I represent my country, Madagascar for our Annual General Assembly within the United Nations, in this temple of multilateralism, our common home. This year we are celebrating the 80th anniversary of our organization. 80 years... 80 years of keeping the flame of unity alive, of establishing peace, of building a just and united world. 80 years of the UN represent a stage and not an outcome. And it is here, in this symbolic place – at the United Nations General Assembly that we discuss, propose and decide on the main directions for a peaceful and prosperous world. This is where we find solutions to conflicts, and responses to crises. It is here that we chart the path to our common future. Allow me to extend my warm congratulations to Mrs. Annalena Baerbock, for her election as President of this 80th General Assembly. Madam President, I wish you every success in carrying out your mandate. Be assured of Madagascar’s full support in accomplishing your mission. I would also like to salute the Secretary General of the United Nations, whose commitment and leadership remind us of our mission which is to place people at the heart of our actions. Ladies and Gentlemen, The UN has always held an ideal: that of building together a world of peace, justice and hope. The theme chosen this year, “Better together: 80 years and more of peace, development and human rights” reminds us that for several decades, the United Nations has brought people and nations together to promote peace, foster development and defend human rights. - 2 - Today, more than ever, we must reaffirm our collective commitment to building a future of solidarity, to meet the challenges. Because it is by combining our forces that we can transform the hopes of humanity into realities for all. This theme is at the heart of our priorities, and this is also the reason why since the proclamation of our independence 65 years ago, Madagascar joined the UN. This reflects my country's conviction in the ideals of peace, solidarity and cooperation between peoples, advocated by our Charter. Today, to further strengthen this conviction, and for the continuity of the actions of the United Nations System in Madagascar, we will make available several thousand square meters of office space to accommodate a hub for an expanded United Nations presence in the Malagasy territory. The challenges have evolved but we continue to measure the strength of this heritage and the need to adapt it to our daily realities. To name only the economic divides, inequalities and especially the impacts of climate change. These threats weaken peace in our societies and require strong and common measures. One of the demands of our century is that of the development long awaited by our populations. The mission of leaders is to create the conditions enabling every citizen to contribute to national development. This requires a vision based on understanding the realities of the country, promoting its assets and overcoming its difficulties. Madagascar, like many African countries, has abundant natural resources and yet development has been delayed for too long. And it is precisely this delay that we are making up for today through the projects and programs that we are carrying out to transform the country. We must take control of our destiny and be the architects of historic change. Refusing fate, we commit to acting with conviction and determination. It is in this spirit of inclusiveness and sharing that I address you today, not only on behalf of Madagascar, but also on behalf of a continent, and of our organization in order to carry the voice of the SADC which brings together 16 countries of Southern Africa, and which I have the honor of presiding as President of our regional organization. Our objective is to promote industrialization, the transformation of the agricultural system and the energy transition in order to make our countries and our people more resilient. Clear and forward-looking, this objective reflects our common ambition to strengthen our economies, develop our resources and ensure the well-being of our populations. It's a pact - 3 - It's a commitment. It is the road map for a region that wants to write its destiny with its own hands and for its people. Today, in the world we live in, wars come in many forms. There are armed wars, visible and bloody, which destroy infrastructure, entire cities and take the lives of innocent people. There is the war against pandemics, like that of Covid -19, which we have faced together – a global battle which has cost the lives of more than 14 million people. And currently, there is another form of war, the quieter economic and commercial war but which could be just as destructive because its impact could deprive millions of people of an income, a job and a future. What do all these wars have in common? They kill. Directly or indirectly. They weaken our societies, they threaten peace and human dignity. This is why we must be vigilant. Today, a topic at the heart of the news particularly touches us. Because among the 16 countries making up the Southern African Community or SADC, 14 are beneficiaries of the AGOA program. AGOA, I remind you, is an American initiative which offers African countries preferential access to the United States market, by promoting exports without customs duties and stimulating trade. And for the SADC region alone, this represents 358,000 direct jobs which are now threatened, including 60% in the textile sector and the rest spread across various sectors. Failure to renew AGOA would have profound social consequences. The employability of thousands of young people and the economic momentum of our nations would be threatened. Because today, thanks to AGOA, SADC countries export more than 11 billion dollars per year to the United States. Behind this figure, more than 1.7 million people are affected. So if AGOA disappears, more than 700,000 direct and indirect jobs could be lost in the Southern Africa region alone. While behind every job, there is a mother who feeds her children. There is a young person who is continuing his studies. There is a family who remains hopeful. AGOA is not a simple trade law. They are faces. Lives. Entire communities who fight every day for their dignity. - 4 - This is why, As current President of SADC, I solemnly request the extension of AGOA for our member countries in order to avoid disastrous economic and social consequences. I appeal to our American partners: Let us make together the choice of stability, The choice of hope, The choice of dignity. I advocate for the continuation of a lasting partnership between the United States and the African continent. Preserving AGOA means preserving social peace in the countries that depend on it. It also protects twenty years of progress, and guarantee a better future for our families and our youth. We want fair trade, fair partnerships, and shared prosperity. We talk here in the concert of Nations about peace and security. So solidarity between Nations should not just be promises and speeches but must translate into commitments that guarantee the daily lives of millions of families across the World. Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Our vision is clear. Develop our country through the promotion of industrialization, produce and transform locally everything our populations need. Reduce imports, innovate, build factories and value chains capable of creating decent and sustainable jobs. In Madagascar over the last 5 years, we have followed suit by installing infrastructure and semi-industrial parks throughout the national territory in order to stimulate growth. I firmly believe that development requires investment, by leveraging the potential of each country, its human capital, and the political will of its leaders. Furthermore, Agricultural Transformation is the key to combating poverty, because our food sovereignty is the basis of our economic independence. So let us plant the seeds of prosperity and autonomy today, so that tomorrow our people can feed themselves. In Madagascar, in the field of agriculture, we have supported the transformation and promotion of local products. We initiated the process of mechanization of our agriculture and we supported our farmers by providing them with improved seeds and inputs. Our objective is to double or even triple agricultural yield from 3 to 9 tonnes per hectare to achieve food self-sufficiency. - 5 - Finally, there is no development without reliable, accessible and affordable energy. In Madagascar, we are accelerating the energy transition in order to achieve 70% green energy production by 2028. To do this, we will exploit our immense solar, wind and hydroelectric potential. Because as you know, even today in many African countries, such as in Madagascar, electricity production relies mainly on thermal power plants. This dependence on fossil fuels has an enormous economic cost. Investing in renewable energy is therefore not only an obligation but a duty for a sustainable and inclusive future. In just 6 years, the rate of access to electricity in my country has increased from 24% to 40%. Notable progress has been made but much remains to be done. We will further intensify efforts to increase clean energy production so that isolated rural populations are not left behind. In this context, collaboration with the United Nations system plays an essential role in promoting projects with an impact on rural communities. These initiatives illustrate a desire to build a more equitable, sustainable and innovative energy future. Finally, building modern infrastructure is an obligatory step for the economic and tourist development of the country. From East to West, from North to South, Madagascar is transforming. We launched the project to build the country's first highway connecting Antananarivo to the large port in the east of the island. We have modernized public transport in the Capital through the construction of cable or cable car transport and also the establishment of the urban train. This helps relieve congestion in the city by transporting more than 40,000 passengers per day at full potential, and thus reducing traffic by 2,000 vehicles daily. Furthermore, we have strengthened the presence of the state in all localities of the country, especially the most isolated, through the construction infrastructure close to the population and which it needs. • We have built thousands of social housing units. • We have modernized care through the construction of public hospitals and basic health centers throughout the national territory. If the country only had 16 university hospitals until 2018, we tripled this number by building 30 other new reference hospitals in just 6 years. • We supported the entrepreneurship of young people and women to aim for their empowerment. - 6 - • We have built stadiums and sports fields, which become places of cohesion, national pride and emancipation for young people. Moreover, the holding of the Youthconnekt Summit in Madagascar in November is part of this commitment to youth in favor of equality and inclusion – and for which we are already inviting you to participate massively. • Finally, from a social protection point of view, more than 250 million dollars were transferred directly to the most vulnerable families to improve their daily lives. These achievements reflect our desire to build a united, connected and forward-looking country. But the demographic dividend remains a variable that must enter into the equation. We need to change the structure of the population because current population growth is not proportional to economic growth. In certain regions, young girls under 18 are already mothers and the majority of women find themselves with an average of five to eight children in their care. They have more difficulty feeding, raising, caring for and educating them properly. This is why we have intensified the family planning program to control births and transform the currently dependent population into an active and economically productive population. Demography will become an asset for Madagascar and no longer a hindrance to development. Excellencies Ladies and Gentlemen, If we want to offer a better future to our children, we must protect the Planet that hosts us. Madagascar is a nature sanctuary. With its 5% of global biodiversity and 80% endemic species, it absolutely must be protected. And as in other regions of the world, these treasures are in danger. Faced with deforestation and climatic hazards, island countries like us are suffering the consequences of global warming. Cyclones are becoming more and more frequent. They follow one another and are more and more evasive. Floods destroy our fields and jeopardize the harvest and income of farmers. Madagascar is one of the countries suffering from the consequences of climate change. Our planet is burning, our ecosystems are deteriorating while actions and funding are not keeping up. It is high time to take action. We have made the observations. Now let's act together. - 7 - This is why we are once again calling for climate justice so that polluting countries assume their responsibilities, so that the funding promised for adaptation is actually delivered. We have already reaffirmed our commitment to preserving this common heritage with a massive reforestation program, planting millions of trees each year. Thus, Madagascar has joined the Coalition of “G-Zero” carbon neutral countries and is positioning itself as a model actor. We have also strengthened the protection of our protected areas. Our ambition is to restore our forests and develop the green and blue economy. Excellencies, Dear Leaders of the World, Here and now, at this august podium, I call for unity and action. Now is not the time for reflection… but for concerted strategies. The time is no longer for dependence... but for sovereign affirmation. The time is no longer slowness… but acceleration, audacity and efficiency. Our mission is our reason for being. Our destiny. A destiny which aims to improve the daily lives of citizens and which touches every life, every child, every mother. So let's ask ourselves the question: What world do we choose for our children and for the future of the next generation? For my people, for progress, I will never stop deploying all ways and means to accelerate the transformation of my country. Go faster. Go further. With courage, with hope. Yes, the task is immense, And the expectations of the population are great. But we know one thing: Division is not a solution. Confrontation breeds instability. So let's choose unity. Let's choose solidarity. Let us choose to build, rather than destroy. Because every child has the right to dream, And every people the right to hope. So let's move forward, united, standing, together. Let's move towards the world we want. - 8 - I dream, for my country, for Madagascar, for Southern Africa, for the African continent and for all the voices that are still little heard, of a future where: • peace always prevails over war, • where development benefits every human being, • where fundamental rights are never negotiable, • and where nature is preserved as our most sacred heritage. So YES, we will be better together: for peace, for development and for future generations. Because history has taught us... That when we choose unity, we roll back instability. When we cultivate solidarity, we sow prosperity. So that the next eight decades are marked by fairer, more inclusive and more effective global governance. Long live the United Nations, Long live cooperation between peoples, And long live Madagascar. Ary samia isika rehetra ho tahin’Andriamanitra! And God bless us. Thank you. Andry RAJOELINA President of the Republic of Madagascar Current President of SADC