1/9 Madam President: It is time for women. And Mexico has made this very clear after the overwhelming election of Dr. Claudia Sheinbaum Pardo as our country's first President. It is an honor for me to participate in this General Assembly on your behalf, and to be the voice of a government that consolidates, in practice, the transformation of public life in Mexico. I come from a country that was born in the wisdom, courage and dignity of its native peoples, with a fruitful political history of extraordinary heroes and heroines, who built a free, independent and sovereign country. Now also, it must be said, an increasingly prosperous country. The Mexican people are a fraternal people, within and beyond their borders. This has been demonstrated as an active and responsible member within the United Nations community, under the premise of defending the dignity and rights of individuals and peace-loving nations, with full respect for the sovereign equality of states. The historical moment that we live in Mexico, under the leadership of our first woman president, is rooted in a thought that we have called Mexican humanism. The path outlined for seven years is clear and has a universal vocation: to consolidate a society in democracy, freedom, equality and shared prosperity. For the good of all, first the poor. 2/9 The guiding axis of the project is a vision of justice, full recognition of the dignity of people and inclusive social development, without discrimination. It is a project that establishes a division between political power and economic power; that advances in the exercise of a moral economy, which seeks coordination and cooperation with external actors, but does not accept any subordination. National sovereignty is inalienable. This new way of doing politics has given voice and agency to those who had historically been relegated to oblivion and marginalization: women, girls, indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples, young people, LGBT+ people and older adults. The results prove us right: • The UN itself has recognized that 13.5 million Mexican men and women escaped poverty thanks to a labor justice policy and social programs. • Inequality is reduced. • Peace is built and violence is contained. • Justice has come to the native peoples. • There is democracy, freedoms, plurality and the right to dissent. • Justice is transformed and today, an indigenous person is president of the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. • We have the largest reforestation program in the world, with 100 billion trees planted. • Girls, boys and young people are incorporated into social programs and have access to school. 3/9 • Older adults have a guaranteed and universal pension. • Women exercise power. These are some of our strengths that we have achieved in this Fourth Transformation of the public life of Mexico, and that should be expressed out loud from this platform. As members of the international community, the challenges we face are enormous: poverty persists in a world of exorbitant wealth, there are countries that spend more on servicing their debt than on the investments they can make for the health and education of their people, and spending on weapons has grown at three times the rate of the world economy, to name a few. The diagnosis has always been clear: the arms race, the immoral concentration of wealth and violations of international law and human rights are the fuel that fuels war and violence. Mexico has not forgotten the lessons of history. 80 years ago we participated in the founding of the UN, convinced of the moral obligation we have as a nation to contribute to avoiding the scourge of wars. It is no coincidence that many of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations have a mirror in the constitutional principles of our foreign policy: self-determination of peoples, peaceful resolution of disputes, prohibition of the threat or use of force, legal equality of states, cooperation for development and defense of human rights. Without intending to be exhaustive, let me share some premises that can contribute to finding a better course for the international community: 1) In the world, a moral economy of well-being is needed. The mobilization of regional coalitions in favor of well-being is necessary, with the purpose of catalyzing effective cooperation for development that assumes that the fight against poverty is the investment with the best rate of return, financial and social; an international financial architecture that includes criteria of collective well-being and trade based on clear rules with shared benefits among peoples. 2) Peace is built from the bottom up Ensuring well-being implies addressing the structural causes of violence and thus building peace, from the bottom up. Conflict resolution often begins at home, continues in education, in decent employment with a fair salary and social security, which allows the inclusion of the entire social fabric. The international community must review, with a more critical and innovative spirit, what young people have today as life alternatives. 5/9 Likewise, it is up to the international community to put a stop to the arms race, not only nuclear weapons, but also the illicit trafficking of firearms and the maelstrom of arms spending, which feeds poverty and exacerbates the conflict. In the face of the resounding proliferation of weapons, we must put politics, mediation, diplomacy, law and dialogue first. The United Nations must play a much more active role in preventing and resolving these conflicts. Multilateralism must once again be the space in which controversies are resolved. And this brings us to the third premise. 3) International law must be vindicated along with human rights If we truly want to avoid the proliferation of conflicts that impact the life and dignity of people, we must respect international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Whether in the Middle East, Europe or anywhere else on the planet, war causes intolerable suffering, which also threatens to unleash an even greater escalation of war, which can even become deeply destructive on a global level. The wars in Gaza and Ukraine have to stop now. 6/9 We will not stop insisting on the urgent call for a ceasefire to reach a negotiated solution, with the participation of all the parties directly involved. The solution will have to be diplomatic, or it will hardly be so. Mexico will always advocate for the peaceful solution of conflicts and therefore rejects sanctions and trade blockades that only harm the well-being of the people and do not build regions of peace or prosperity. Without hesitation, we reaffirm our historic position against the blockade of Cuba and our call to eliminate this country from the list of those that support terrorism. Respecting international law is the safeguard of peace. It is the antidote to a logic of power that harms the weakest nations. In the words of our Benemérito of the Americas, Benito Juárez García, everything by reason and law, nothing by force. Madam President: The fight for justice is anchored in the conviction that we are all equal before the law; obliged by fraternity to understand and respect each other as equals in dignity and rights. Mexico has an unfailing commitment to human rights, freedoms and non-compliance. discrimination in the world. We condemn classism, racism and any form of discrimination, including discrimination due to sexual diversity and gender identity. 7/9 We particularly reject the criminalization of people who, for some reason, have had to leave their homes and find themselves in need to migrate, either to seek refuge or to escape conditions of injustice or poverty. For us, migrants are people with rights who take care of their families and contribute with their efforts to enrich and strengthen their host communities. Migration is inherent to our species. Only by understanding the phenomenon and addressing its structural causes can we move towards a global and regional collaboration scheme that allows us to move towards safer and more orderly mobility. Let there be no doubt: Mexico will not stop ensuring the care and protection of Mexicans who are outside our country and who deserve all our support and the assistance they require. In this framework of justice and rights, we inscribe the fight of women and for gender equality because, despite progress, gaps remain, as well as sexist violence in the world, which takes away freedoms from girls, young women and women in all their diversity. 30 years after the Beijing declaration and platform for action, the diagnosis and roadmap are clear. We invite all nations to mobilize to accelerate progress towards gender equality. 8/9 In my country, the transformation of consciousness has been intrinsically linked to the fight for gender equality. Today in Mexico, gender parity prevails in the legislative and judicial branches, and public policies are designed with a strict gender perspective inscribed in our constitution. Madam President: 80 years after its founding, the UN must recognize the serious dilemma it faces: it cannot be left behind. It must now be seen, once again, as an institution that contributes to the containment of war as well as to the prevention of pandemics, or to the construction of narratives that give rise to public policies in favor of human dignity. Enough of getting lost in the rituals of a diplomacy that lacks content and in the labyrinths of political simulation. We think that the UN must return to its principles and purposes; return to its fundamental bases, which are the maintenance of international peace and security, sustainable development and the protection and promotion of human rights. These objectives must be redirected. Everything must revolve around this task, from the exercise of the budget to the review of the thousands of mandates that we have given to the Secretariat, many of them with little value today. The resources available to the Organization, 9/9 increasingly limited, must be used with the greatest possible rigor. The legitimacy of the UN will increasingly depend on its ability to respond to the serious challenges that the world faces. We trust that the next Secretary General, who we hope will be a woman from our region, will accelerate the transformation process that we have launched, with the aim of ensuring peace and justice, the well-being and freedom of people, the sustainability of the planet and shared prosperity. In Mexico, it is women's time and it has gone very well for us. We think that at the UN, it is also women's time.