Speech by Major General Abdoulaye MAIGA, Prime Minister, Head of Government of Mali, General Debate of the 80th Ordinary Session of the United Nations General Assembly. New York, September 26, 2025 2 • Madam President of the General Assembly, • Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of State and Government, • Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, • Ladies and Gentlemen, At the beginning of my remarks, I have the honor to address you cordial greetings and to convey to you the messages of the Founding Fathers of the Confederation of Sahel States (AES) Their Excellencies General of the Army Assimi GOITA, President of the Transition, Head of State of the Republic of Mali, President of the Confederation of Sahel States (AES), Captain Ibrahim TRAORE, President of Faso, Head of State, and General of the Army Abdourahamane TIANI, President of the Republic of Niger, Head of State. Please also receive the warm greetings of the worthy people of the AES, more determined than ever to free themselves from the yoke of imperialism and to achieve their self-determination in a pan-Africanist spirit. In sending you the best wishes of the Confederation of Sahel States for your election as president of this 80th session of the General Assembly, Madam President, I congratulate, at the same time, your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang, of the Republic of Cameroon, for his exemplary leadership during the work of the 79th session. Finally, allow me to reiterate to the Secretary General, Mr. António GUTERRES, our appreciation of the efforts he continues to deploy to achieve the noble objectives of our common Organization. • Ladies and Gentlemen, The theme of this 80th session of the General Assembly, namely “Better together: more than 80 years in the service of peace, development and human rights” is of particular importance for the member states of the AES Confederation. 3 Yes, peace, mutual aid, development and the preservation of human rights remain the main objectives, even the reason for existence of the United Nations. Unfortunately, these essential objectives have never been so shaken in the world and in the Sahel precisely, mainly due to obscurantist armed groups exploited and supported by foreign state sponsors. The member states of the Confederation of Sahel States are at the forefront of the fight against terrorism, which constitutes both a real threat to international peace and security, but also and above all a serious attack on the very foundations of our States. Under the leadership of our Heads of State, the Defense and Security Forces of the three countries of the AES Confederation work closely, in an unprecedented surge of collaboration and complementarity, and are driven by a common commitment and a pooling of efforts, to stem the scourge of terrorism. This new dynamic, based around strengthening the operational capabilities of our Defense and Security Forces, through massive recruitment, adequate training and the provision of appropriate equipment, produces encouraging results on the ground every day, thus confirming the relevance of our sovereign decision to come together to fight our common enemies. Unlike certain States which have opened passage corridors on their territory to terrorists, with a view to attacking other countries, or to offer their territory as a rear base, the founding fathers of the AES, out of pan-Africanist commitment, and in the concern to preserve the interests of their populations, decided to secure their country while avoiding a spread of the threat to other African regions, or even in the world, thus carrying out real work of protection. regional and global public security. He doesn't do there is no doubt that through their sacrifice, the valiant Defense and Security Forces of the AES contribute to the security of other regions, particularly the countries located on the West African coast. We take this opportunity to bow to the memory of the civilian and military victims of insecurity in the Sahel. 4 The sovereignist approach implemented is part of the vision carried by the Heads of State of the AES dedicated to the security of our States, following the withdrawal of international Forces. Defying all predictions and far from scuttling each other, our countries have demonstrated ingenuity based on the historical and geographical substrate and the capacity for resilience of the Confederate peoples who, despite more than a decade of security and humanitarian crises, continue to demonstrate an exceptional strength of patriotic commitment. In short, our three countries were able to provide a coordinated and endogenous response to this war that was imposed on us. This is the place to renew here the full determination of the AES Confederation to become a pan-Africanist regional power; to continue and intensify its actions, with a view to driving terrorism out of our common space forever; to consolidate the authority of the State; to protect our populations and their property, and to ensure our prosperity. The AES Confederation strongly reiterates its firm condemnation of the open and sometimes publicly expressed support of foreign state sponsors who, for imperialist motives, destabilize our entity on the one hand, by making advisors, logistical means, and weapons and ammunition available to terrorist groups, on the other hand by granting them political support and offering them rear bases located in certain neighboring countries, in violation of all international rules. • Ladies and Gentlemen, As distant as it seems, the war in Ukraine and terrorism in the Sahel have connections. 5 As a reminder, after the terrorist attack against a patrol of the Malian Defense and Security Forces, from July 24 to 26, 2024 in Tinzawatène, in the Kidal region, Mali denounced this incident in its 2024 speech here, and condemned the attitude of Ukrainian officials who publicly claimed their participation in the said terrorist attack. From this atypical behavior, we simply deduced that Ukrainian officials have unfortunately confused the international scene and the theater stage. A year later, the situation has escalated and the Ukrainian regime has become one of the main suppliers of suicide drones to terrorist groups around the world. In this context, certain Western states must stop supplying weapons to Ukraine, at the risk of contributing to the promotion of international terrorism. For others, including the French regime, nostalgic for colonization and concerned about its loss of influence in the Sahel, support for the Ukrainian regime is a maneuver consisting of occupying the attention of the international community on the war in Ukraine, while sponsoring terrorist groups operating in the Sahel. Faithful to the principles of the United Nations Charter, Mali had, on August 15, 2022, seized the United Nations Security Council with a view to a meeting of the Council, so that my country could provide irrefutable proof of France's support for terrorist activities. Until now, the request has remained unanswered while their sabotage actions continue at various levels. It is time to act, so that those responsible for this violence are identified and brought to justice, that the resolutions are translated into concrete commitments, that the Sahelian space is definitively secured and that the resources of the Sahel benefit the populations of the Sahel. International institutions, first and foremost the UN, were created following the Second World War to protect people against excessive violence, the logic of annihilation and silent genocides. 6 It is high time that global conscience awakens and international institutions take their share of responsibility by truly responding to the cries of distress of oppressed peoples who are claiming their sovereignty. The AES Confederation reiterates its commitment to cooperate with all States, regional and international partner organizations which respect its sovereignty, its sovereign political choices, its priorities in terms of security, the fight against terrorism, economic and social development, within the framework of a win-win partnership for the realization of the aspirations of its populations. • Ladies and Gentlemen, In addition to security efforts for the return of peace to our countries, the Governments of the AES Confederation are working to implement a global and integrated strategy, which includes political measures, economic and social development, justice and reconciliation. By choosing the path of audacity and sovereignty, the Confederal Authorities have launched disruptive initiatives based on endogenous development. This is a clear path, that of bringing ourselves the essential added value to our economies and preserving the dignity of our people. This choice, which we fully accept, reflects our firm and unwavering desire to take control of our destiny. In the same vein, we have placed strategic investment policies in different priority areas such as infrastructure, energy, industrialization and diversification of the economy at the heart of our national and federal priorities. Part of this dynamic is the creation of the Confederal Bank for Investment and Development aimed at carrying out confederal projects. 7 The Confederation of Sahel States bases its development ambitions on undeniable assets: a vast territory of 2,800,000 square kilometers and a population of 75 million inhabitants, the majority of whom are young people. Added to this is its strong, committed and active diaspora. It also counts on its fertile lands, its numerous rivers, its energy sources and its reservoirs of mineral resources among the most important in the world. • Ladies and Gentlemen, The third dimension of the theme of this 80th session of the Assembly concerns human rights. The AES Confederation reaffirms its commitment to respecting and ensuring respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian law, in accordance with its millennia-old humanist history and its national and international commitments. However, we remain strongly opposed to the exploitation of the issue of human rights for political purposes or the destabilization of our national institutions, or even our sovereign and independent states. Tired of this situation and anxious to preserve the sovereignty and dignity of the people, the Heads of State of the AES Confederation withdrew, with immediate effect, from the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, on September 22, 2025. Added to this withdrawal is their desire to henceforth favor endogenous mechanisms of justice, in line with their societal values ​​and in the interest of the people of the AES. We also denounce the double standard observed by certain international actors, whose cursor moves according to their interests. These lesson-givers are not themselves the best examples of respect for human rights. We call on our partners to prioritize dialogue and cooperation, which remain the best levers for promoting human rights throughout the world. 8 • Ladies and Gentlemen, As we celebrate the 80th anniversary of United Nations, it is clear that our multilateral framework, embodied by the UN, is being put to the test, in an international context marked by polarization, the progressive return of nationalism, protectionism, withdrawal and power struggles. Despite this current reality, the observation is that the three major objectives recorded in the Charter of the United Nations, namely peace, development and human rights, remain relevant. To achieve these objectives, we need: - First, a United Nations that is truly renovated, reformed and adapted to the demands of our time. This is an essential condition to better establish its international legitimacy and ensure the effective application of its decisions. This is an opportunity to forcefully recall that Africa has been asking for reforms for around twenty years to repair the historical injustice done to it, with regard to its representativeness on the Security Council. I hereby reaffirm the full support of the AES Confederation for the common African position on this issue, set out in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, so that Africa can have two permanent seats and five non-permanent seats. - Secondly, we need a United Nations that guarantees respect for international law for all. We are concerned to see flagrant violations of international law around the world, with complete impunity. This 80th anniversary of the UN is, for us Member States, an opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering attachment to a multilateral framework based on law, and not force. 9 - Third, we need robust mechanisms for monitoring and implementing the conclusions of international conferences. The observation in this area is clear: from the creation of the UN in 1945 to the present day, we have held dozens of international conferences whose commitments have been very weakly, if not not, implemented for the benefit of the populations we represent here. This situation absolutely must change. This is why we are pleading for the envisaged reforms to address this issue, so that our respective Nations can benefit from the dividends of the commitments made under the aegis of the United Nations. For its part, the Confederation of Sahel States is prepared to make its contribution with a view to the now essential reform of the United Nations multilateral framework. Regarding current global governance, it appears more and more obvious that it is no longer adapted to current and future challenges. Rather, it needs a bolder overhaul of international economic and financial bodies, which would benefit from taking charge of the question of financing security and the fight against exogenous crises. In this regard, innovative mechanisms such as BRICS offer a constructive alternative that is more respectful of the interests of emerging and developing countries, as do African development financing initiatives, to which the Sahel countries pay particular attention to break the vicious circle of dependence and over-indebtedness. In this dynamic, Africa's concerns in terms of economic and social development must be taken into account. An Africa presented as a continent of the future, rich in its youth, but unfortunately facing the heavy burden of external debt, the plundering of its resources, unequal trade, the negative transfer of resources and the vagaries of climate change, among other challenges. 10 • Ladies and Gentlemen, At the national level, Mali, in its quest for lasting peace and stability and in accordance with the aspirations of its populations expressed during the Inter-Malian Dialogue for Peace and Reconciliation, has adopted a Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation. The result of an inclusive participatory process focused on dialogue and consultation between Malians from all socio-professional strata and the diaspora, the Charter embodies our determination to strengthen national ownership of the peace process in Mali. It draws on our realities, our traditional values ​​and our endogenous dispute resolution mechanisms, in order to resolutely turn towards a shared and promising future. On July 22, 2025, during the official presentation of the Charter, His Excellency Army General Assimi GOITA, President of the Transition, Head of State of the Republic of Mali, in his speech emphasized the historical significance of this event in these terms: “this ceremony is all the more singular in that it is the bearer of a collective dream, that of the hope of lasting peace, of social cohesion, in sum it reconciliation in our dear homeland. Regarding regional concerns, I cannot ignore the destruction of a drone-type aircraft of the Malian Armed Forces on April 1, 2025 by the Algerian junta. Mali strongly condemns this aggression and has referred the matter to the International Court of Justice. Since its accession to independence on September 22, 1960, Mali has spared no effort for the decolonization of the African continent. As such, he actively supported, in an exceptional manner, Algeria in its war of liberation against the French colonizer. In view of this constant political position in favor of Pan-Africanism, added to the geographical proximity between 2 countries which share a border 13,00 km apart, Mali has always observed benevolent attention towards the brotherly Algerian people. 11 Contrary to this constructive approach to Mali, we will highlight 3 incongruous and incomprehensible situations which have marked recent relations between our two countries: 1. The cowardly and treacherous attack which targeted the Malian Armed Forces in Tinzawatène, took place a few kilometers from the Algerian border. Curiously, the Algerian junta neither saw nor heard anything, even though the terrorist act was planned on its territory. Troubling for a country which was designated as champion of the African Union in the fight against terrorism and which has become, in recent years, champion of the promotion of terrorism and exporter of terrorists! 2. As announced, the Algerian junta shot down a Malian drone purchased with its own funds, at the expense of the Malian taxpayer, on the false grounds of violating their airspace. Mali is troubled by the thesis of the Algerian junta defying the laws of physics and according to which an object shot down in the air is capable of moving, from its point of fall, over 22 km, then finding itself on Malian territory. Indeed, it is useful to emphasize that the debris of the Malian drone ended up on Malian territory, thus validating our arguments. 3. On September 4, 2025, the Malian Government informed the public of the filing of an application instituting proceedings with the International Court of Justice, against the Algerian junta, concerning the destruction of the drone. In a press release from the Algerian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, dated September 19, 2025, we learned with deep amazement, an allegation according to which the filing of the Malian request was motivated by the Press Conference of the Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs, which took place on September 13, 2025 and during which he denied the filing of the Malian request to the International Court of Justice. 12 We point out to the Minister that the filing of the request announced by Mali on September 4 never meant its automatic registration by the International Court of Justice. Mali recalls that the Diplomacy aims to defend the interests of one's country. Assuming that the Malian complaint was triggered by his press conference, the fanatic from Algiers demonstrates that his vision of diplomacy is to push other States to pursue his country before international bodies, thus becoming a self-scoring performer, popularly called in Mali “Yabé”. Disturbing! In passing, Mali pays vibrant tribute to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Algerian junta. Indeed, the lie corrupts everything, it has just taken away all credibility from the Algerian version of the destruction of the Malian drone. Also, we were not surprised by the headlong rush of the Algerian junta which refused to give its consent to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice following the affair of the destruction of the Malian drone, thus fearing to be publicly unmasked as an aggressor and supporter of international terrorism. In view of these 3 unusual points, Mali recommends to the Algerian Junta, on the one hand, to adopt this quote from Amadou Hampâté Bâ, in Life and teaching of Tierno Bokar: the Sage of Bandiagara “Certain truths only seem improbable to us, quite simply, because our knowledge does not reach them”. We invite them to seek to know Mali and the values ​​that the Mali Denw embody. Also, in the face of attacks and adversity, we will not be spectators: For each bullet fired against us, we will react with reciprocity. For every word used incorrectly, we will react with reciprocity. On the other hand, it is strongly recommended to the Algerian junta to organize in Tin Zaouatine Algeria, an annual international festival dedicated to the artifice of human intelligence. 13 From this rostrum, we call on the Algerian junta to stop supporting international terrorism and to get resolutely involved in the promotion of peace and security, in a constructive spirit, respecting the sovereignty of States. To the wise, too bad! • Madam President, • Ladies and Gentlemen, This is a good opportunity to present the opinion of a citizen, the Fist raised at the Dawn of our regained sovereignty, shared by the people of the AES Confederation. Our Confederation is made up of fighting nations, a land of resistance. What we face is not a simple inner conflict. It is a hybrid war, supported by imperialist interests, where the enemies of peace sometimes wear ties. If the UN continues to feign ignorance, it will cease to be the sum of the world and become the passive arm of global injustice. We say this: the AES Confederation is not afraid. She won't give in. She will resist again and again. However, the AES Confederation gives the United Nations a historic opportunity to place itself on the side of truth. That of recognizing that the people of the AES are being attacked. That of supporting a Confederation which fights both for itself and for Africa, for the stability of the continent and, indirectly, for that of the entire world. History will judge. She will judge those who armed the forces of evil. She will judge those who looked away. She will judge those who have forgotten that justice is the only path to lasting peace. The AES Confederation does not ask for alms. It calls for awareness. 14 To conclude, I would like to reaffirm here the attachment of the Confederation of Sahel States to the values, goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Also, the AES Confederation indicates that we can only be “better together” if we work collectively for multilateralism with a human face, made of dialogue, based on law, cooperation and solidarity between peoples, promoting peace and development, while respecting the sovereignty of States. However, we cannot and must not continue to do the same thing for years to come, to hope for different results. There is an urgent need for reforms to be made within our existing multilateral framework, embodied by our Common Organization. The celebration of the 80th anniversary of the UN offers us this historic opportunity to adapt the Organization to the realities of the moment, capable of responding effectively to present and future challenges. The AES Confederation remains prepared to play its part, its entire part, in the quest for collective responses, aimed at preserving future generations from the scourge of war, ensuring harmonious development for all, and promoting and protecting human rights. - May God bless the Confederation of Sahel States and preserve its people from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world! - May God bless Mali and protect Malians from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world! - May God bless Africa and protect Africans from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world! - May God bless the world and preserve all humanity from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world! Thank you for your kind attention.