1 
 Please check against delivery  
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. KHURELSUKH UKHNAA,  
PRESIDENT OF MONGOLIA, AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF  
THE 80th  SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
 
(New York, 23 September 2025)  
 
Madam  President,   
Mr. Secretary -General,  
Distinguished delegates,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
At the outset, I wish to extend my sincere congratulations to Ms. Annalena B aerbock, for 
assuming the important  role of the President of the General Assembly at this historic moment  
marking  of the 80th anniversary of the United Nations and my best wishes for a successful 
session.  
Eight centuries ago , the Great Chinggis Khaan established  the Great Mongol ian Empire , 
bringing  together the West and the East under the rule of  justice  and principled statecraft . 
Spanning the vast expanse of Euroasia , the era of the "Pax Mongolica"  heralded a period o f 
remarkable progress and flourishing for  humankind.   
The “Pax Mongolica"  embodied  progressive idea ls that form the basis of today’s 
collective efforts to maintain global peace and stability . 
Then eight decades ago,  when  the dust and ashes of the war had not cleared yet and 
humanity  note healed yet from fear and anxiet y, the United Nations a great  family of nations,  
rose to prominence as a guarantor of  world  peace and security, and a sanctuary of hope  and 
trust.  
Since its establishment , the United Nations has illuminated the path of humanity, serving 
as a steadfast beacon of hope and trust for nations to maintain peaceful co -existence and share 
prosperous future . 

2 
 In today’s volatile and challenging international environment , we welcome “Better 
Together: 80 years and more for peace, development and human rights” as the theme for the 
80th session of the General Assembly  and the General Debate.  
Indeed, this theme calls upon us to assess , and reflect upon , the United Nations’ 
achievements and challenges over the past 80 years, to further strengthen its work in 
accordance with the UN  Charter and the principles of international law, and  to combine our 
collective voices and efforts  in pursuit of concrete and tangible outcomes.  
 
Distinguished delegates,  
Mongolia has consistently upheld to the Charter of the United Nations and universally 
recognized principles and norms of international law, respecting the independence, sovereignty 
and territorial integrity of all state s, resolving disputes by peaceful means, respecting human 
rights and freedoms , and fostering equal and mutually beneficial cooperation.  
Since becoming a full pledged member of the United Nations in 1961, Mongolia has 
steadfastly supported the Organization's efforts to strengthen international peace and security . 
Demonstrating its endu ring commitments to disarmament and non-proliferation and  declaring  
its territory ’s nuclear -weapon -free status.  
Furthermore, Mongolia has actively cooperated with the United Nations at all levels, 
including  establish ing a dialogue mechanism in Northeast Asia, participat ing in the UN 
peacekeeping operations and put ting forward various  proposals and initiatives in the areas of 
socio -economic development, environment and climate change to advance the implementation 
of development goals .          
  During his visit to Mongolia in 2022, United Nations Secretary -General Mr.  António 
Guterres described our nation as a “symbol of peace in a troubled world”. It is a profound 
recognition  of Mongolia’s humble contributions and dedication to the work of the United Nations 
and its enduring commitment to the cause of peace.  
Over the past 23 years , Mongolia has  continuously  deployed  personnel from its Armed 
Forces to United Nations peacekeeping operations, making a meaningful contributi on to global 
and regional peace and security.  
During this period , Mongolia has deployed more than 23,000 peacekeepers to 16 United 
Nations peacekeeping missions  and consistently  ranked among the top 20 troop - and police -
contributing countries out of more than 120 Member States.  
As we mark the 25th anniversary of United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 on 
“Women, Peace and Security”, it is a pleasure to announce that , through the steady increase 
in the deployment of female military personnel, the proportion of women peacekeepers from 
Mongolia has reached 14 percent in 2025.  
3 
 Mongolia will continue to extend  its unwavering support to the United Nations  in its efforts 
to maintain international  peace and security , and remains committed to contributing to 
peacekeeping operations.  
 
Distinguished delegates,   
At this cr itical juncture , with only five years remaining  until the 2030 Agenda  deadline , 
global progress toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) stands at  a mere  
17 percent.  
According to the Sustainable Development Report 2025, Mongolia's implementation of 
the S DGs has reached  66.7 percent , ranking it  14th in the U N Multilateralism Index (UN -MI), a 
testament to  our decades -long effort s, and a worthy achievement.  
I would like to acknowledge the tremendous  efforts of the international community and 
all Member States  in advancing  the implementation of the SDGs. 
We welcome the outcomes of the Fourth  International Conference on Financing for 
Development, held recently in Seville, Spain, where a broad consensus was reached on the 
crucial  role of financing in achieving the SDGs. We also appreciate th at the conference agreed 
to increase  engagement of developing countries and to take comprehensive  actions aimed at 
reforming the current international financial architecture.  
Within the framework of implement ing the “Seville Commitment” adopted at the 
Conference, it is essential to direct  international development cooperation to ward  support ing 
the most vulnerable groups and  address ing their challenges.  
It is my pleasure to note that Mongolia  has been playing an active role within the United 
Nations in advocating the interests of landlocked developing countries  (LLDCs) , in r aising 
awareness  of their special needs and unique circumstances , closely collaborat ing with them  to 
ensure  their voices  heard at global stage.   
The Third United Nations Conference on LLDCs  was held in August in Turkmenistan, 
and adopted the Awaza Programme of Action for 2024 -2034.  
LLDCs have long faced trade and economic development  challenges  due to their 
geographic location. Member States  have commit ted to implement ing the programme  to 
advance the development of LLDCs over the next decade and to bring positive improvements 
to the livelihoods of more than 600 million people living in these countries.  
To ensure the effective implementation of the Awaza Programme of Action, it is crucial 
for LLDCs  to align their national developmen t plans  with the programme while mobilizing all 
available resources to strengthen regional integration and cooperation.  
Furthermore, we call upon the international community, financial institutions,  and 
development partners to provide  concrete support and cooperat ion with LLDCs.  
4 
 Distinguished delegates,  
Mother Earth is  our one and only home.  
However, as a result of humanity’s careless behavior towards the environment , Mother 
Earth  - with her very existence under threat  - is sending a distress call , like a patient in critica l 
condition . 
If we do not  take a resolute action  to preserve our Mother Earth now, she will inevitably 
find her own way to survive  with or without us . 
Since ancient times, we Mongolians have believe d that all beneath the sky  is alive. We 
have revered mountains, rivers, plants,  and animals , understanding that the harmony of the 
earth and  the living world are inseparably intertwined  with the inner life and conscious  actions 
of humanity.  
Two millennia ago, the Great Khaan Modun of the Hun s - Mongols’ ancestors  - 
proclaimed  that the very foundation of the state  is the land .” Thus, th is time-honored tradition 
of revering nature  was recognized by UNESCO through the inscription of the “Mongolian 
traditional ritual of worshipping sacred sites” on the List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage in 
need of Urgent Safeguarding . 
We, Mongolians , are people blessed with the beautiful tradition of living in harmony with 
Mother N ature, preserving her pristine purity , and nurturing our children  from early age  with the 
mindset and spirit to protect her .  
Accordingly , the UN General Assembly resolution entitled “ Eight Hundred Years of 
Mongolian Statehood ”, adopted in 2005, highly appreciat ed the contribution of Mongols to the 
history of mankind and  recognized that “the ever -increasing significance and relevance of a 
culture of living in harmony with nature, which is inherent in nomadic civilization, in today’s 
world .” 
Today, we are committed to shar ing our cultural heritage and traditional knowledg e - 
rooted in a profound  respect for living in harmony with nature  - with the international community , 
as a valuable contribution to building resilience and enhancing adaptation to climate change.  
In 2026, Mongolia will host the 17th  session of the Conference  of the Parties to the UN 
Convention to Combat Desertification , as well as  observe  the International Year of Rangelands 
and Pastoralists. In this spirit , our country, in partnership with the United Nations, is 
spearheading the international 10 -year “Rangeland  Flagship  Initiative.” We warmly invite you 
to join us  in support ing and collaborat ing on this important endeavor.  
Our people say, “Water is the source of life  and tree is the source of water .”  
Access  to safe drinking water is declining worldwide , with 3.6 billion people currently 
affected by water scarcity.  
5 
 Therefore, it is imperative for countries to implement integrated management of land and 
water resources in a coordinated manner and to place special emphasis on preventing water 
scarcity.  
I cordially  invite you all to participate , at the highest level  and with broad representation , 
in the 17th session of the Conference of the Parties to the UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification, scheduled  on 17 -28 August  2026 in Ulaanbaatar. This conference  seek s 
comprehensive solutions to adapt to climate change, protect and enhanc e water resources, 
and combat desertification and land degradation.  
Distinguished delegates,  
From the moment of birth, we Mongols have grown up on horseback, carrying  our glory 
across the world  on noble steeds and  contributing to the writing of human ity’s proud  and 
enduring  history . 
We, Mongol ians, are a nation stepped in  a unique cultural heritage. We honor our noble 
horse in our State Emblem, craft our State Flag with the mane and tail hair of our swift steeds, 
and souls of people around the world are spellbound by the haunting melody of morin khuur 
(horse -headed fiddle) . 
Horses have been integral to  human livelihoods , culture, and civilization since time 
immemorial.  
With the goal of preserv ing and safeguarding cultural heritage and traditions associated 
with horses , and highlighting  their enduring role in livelihood s of human kind, Mongolia proposed 
a resolution to designate 11 July as World Horse Day. This resolution was adopted during the 
Plenary Meeting of the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly on 3 June  2025 . 
On this occasion, I would like to extend my deepest gratitude , on behalf of the horse -
loving people of Mongolia, to all UN Member States for their support in adopting th is resolution 
to designate and observe “World Horse Day” on the day of Mongolia ’s National Naadam 
Festival, which is  also inscribed on UNESCO’s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity.  
  
Distinguished delegates,  
This year, countries around the world are assessing  the progress made over the past 30 
years since the adoption of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action.  
Mongolia has undertaken a broad range of policies and activities to advance the social 
development goals outlined  in these milestone documents , related legal frameworks  and the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development . These efforts have been focusing  on poverty 
6 
 reduction,  promot ing social equality and inclusion, support ing families, children and youth , and 
protecti ng the rights of the elderly and persons with disabilities.  
Among  these efforts , the state policy on gender equality  aims  to ensure equal rights, 
opportunities and treatment for both women and men, while actively preventing and eliminating 
gender -based discrimination.  
Notably , Mongolia has prioritized advancing gender equality and increasing women’s 
participation in decision -making , with women now making 25 percent in the parliament.  
We are pleased to underscore  that, according to  the Global Gender Gap Report 2025 
by the World Economic Forum, Mongolia ranked 65th globally , improving by  20 places from the 
previous year and securing  5th place in the Asia -Pacific region.  
In recent years, Mongolia has regularly hosted international events dedicated to women  
and gender equality , including the  International Conference on “Strengthening the Role of 
Women in Peacekeeping” in 2022, the Female Foreign Ministers ’ Meeting in 2023, and the 
World Women’s Forum in 2024 , in co operation with the United Nations.  
Last month , we successfully hosted the World Women Entrepreneurs’ Forum under the 
theme “Inspire, Impact, Invest ” in Ulaanbaatar . 
I wish to extend my heartfelt gratitude  to all countries that supported and participated in 
the Forum.  
Mongolia will continue to serve  a strong bridge of partnership, cooperation,  and solidarity  
in advancing  women’s leadership and participation  at all levels of social and political  life. 
 
Distinguished delegates,  
The ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus once said, “The only constant in life is 
change .” 
Supported by its Member States, successive UN leaderships have consistently pursued 
reform s to refine  the organization’s structure and operations across all aspects.  
In this context, Mongolia welcomes and supports the “UN80” initiative presented by UN 
Secretary -General   António Guterres.  
We are confident that  ensuring  gender equality in senior leadership positions within the 
United Nations  will undoubtedly ha ve a positive impact on fostering more transparent, 
balanced,  and inclusive decision -making processes.  
Therefore, we support initiatives to nominate women  candidates  for the position of UN 
Secretary -General and Rotation  for Equality Initiative, which calls for  gender rotation  in the 
position of the  President of the UN General Assembly.  
7 
 Furthermore, Mongolia upholds and implements the principles of the UN Charter and 
universally recognized norms of international law , actively contribut ing to the strengthening of 
the UN -centered multilateral system. Mongolia reaffirms its commitment to the UN reform, 
particularly  of the Security Council, to ensure it  reflects current realities  and embodies  equitable 
and fair representation, inclusivity, transparency, effectiveness, democracy,  and accountability.  
In an era defined by escalating conflicts, rising wall s of dis trust, and deepening divisions, 
it is more vital than ever  to foster  international relations grounded not merely in multi polar ity, 
but on multi -pillar principles that honor the history, culture, civilization, national interests and 
unique development paths of each nation.  
The United Nations was established 80  years ago  with the noble  goals of saving 
humanity from scourge of war and maintain ing international peace and security.  
The United Nations, serv ing as the cornerstone for the peaceful and harmonious 
coexistence among nations, must be reinforced and empowered through  strong , multi -pillar 
principles that ensure equal rights and balanced influence.  
Therefore, let us reflect with solemn care on whether the mission  entrusted to  the United 
Nations eight  decades ago ha s been fully realized . And let , all Member States  join hands in a 
shared commitment to revitalize  the Organization  into a powerful institution strong enough to 
usher in  Pax Globalica - a lasting World Peace  – by embodying ideals  of the “Pax Mongolica”, 
which laid the foundation for peaceful coexistence among nations and human progress eight 
centuries ago.  
At this pivotal momen t, as we commemorate the historic 80th anniversary of the United 
Nations, I would like to emphasize the growing importance of its role in fostering mutual 
understanding , trust and respect among nations,  as well as  in advancing peace, stability, 
development  and the vision of a world free from  war.  
Mongolia has consistently pursued a peace -loving , multi -pillar foreign policy, made 
tangible contributions to international peace and sustainable development , and remains  
committed to fulfilling this responsib ility with honor.  
I extend my heartfelt congratulations to you all on the momentous occasion of the 80th 
anniversa ry of the United Nations.  
May the Eternal Blue Sky bless us with peace throughout the world.  
Thank you for your attention!  
 
 
 