General Debate Statement by the Republic of Malawi  
at the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
Delivered by Ambassador Agnes Mary Chimbiri -Molande  
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Malawi  
to the United Nations  
 
Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
Distinguished Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am honored to address this 80th Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly under the theme “Better Together: 80 Years and 
More for Peace, Development, and Human Rights.”  This milestone 
stands as a testament to the United Nations’ extraordinary legacy of 
fostering peace, advancing sustainable development and 
championing human dignity. It affirms humanity’s enduring journey 
to build a world where every generation can flouri sh, where nations 
rise above division to resolve their differences with wisdom, a nd 
where the pursuit of justice and harmony binds us as one global 
community. Malawi recommits to strengthening multilateralism to 
ensure a prosperous, equitable and secure world for current and 
future generations.  
 
 
- 2 - 
 Madam President,  
The theme “Better Together”  aligns closely with Malawi’s Foreign 
Policy, our blueprint for advancing national interests through 
economic diplomacy, protection of sovereignty, and global 
cooperation. Anchored in the Malawi 2063,  our long -term vision, we 
aspire to become a self -reliant, industrialized, upper -middle -income 
nation by 2063, driven by agriculture, tourism, mining, and 
manufacturing. Achieving this goal demands both unwavering 
national commitment and active engagement with the global 
community in a peaceful world. While sovereignty remains the 
cornerstone of our identity to ensure the protection of territorial 
integrity and national resources, our policy equally recognizes that 
global collaboration is essential. In this spirit, Malawi will continue  
to uphold the principles of the UN Charter, promote good 
neighborliness and respect the sovereign equality of all states to 
advance peaceful coexistence and regional, continental and global 
stability.  
 
Madam President,  
Building on our unwavering commitment to sovereignty and 
collaborative partnerships, the Republic of Malawi firmly 
acknowledges that peace and security serve as fundamental pillars 
for sustainable development. Guided by the principle of Umunthu  and 
recognizing our shared humanity, the Republic of Malawi has 
consistently demonstrated her dedication to international peace by 
- 3 - 
 contributing a significant number of troops and police personnel to 
various United Nations missions across the globe.  
 
The Republic of Malawi is resolute in its commitment to preventive 
diplomacy, by actively promoting dialogue, impartiality, and effective 
conflict resolution as essential strategies for fostering stability. This 
commitment is reflected in our active engage ment and unwavering 
support for peace initiatives led by the United Nations, African Union, 
and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). We 
believe that collaborative efforts are essential in addressing 
multifaceted challenges that threaten globa l peace and the rules -
based order.  
 
Furthermore, it is important to highlight the significant strides that 
the Republic of Malawi has made towards promoting participation of 
women in peacekeeping operations.  The Republic of Malawi actively 
prioritizes the deployment of female peacekeepers i n operational 
roles, recognizing their unique ability to connect with and address 
the specific needs and experiences of women in conflict zones. This 
initiative not only empowers female personnel but also enriches the 
overall effectiveness of our peacekeep ing efforts by fostering a deeper 
understanding of the complexities surrounding gender issues in 
these environments.  
 
- 4 - 
 On that note, Madam President,  I am pleased to report that the 
positive outcomes of this approach are becoming increasingly 
evident. The inclusion of women in our peacekeeping forces has 
proven beneficial not just for the missions themselves, but also for 
the communities we serve. Furt hermore, I am proud to say that 
Malawi stands among nations that have registered significant strides 
towards gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. 
In this regard, I would like to reiterate the Malawi Governme nt’s 
commitment to the promotion of women’s participation in all spheres 
of life, at the highest levels possible. We in Malawi believe that no 
meaningful socio -economic progress can happen when half of the 
population is left behind. Our conviction to gende r equality and 
women empowerment is driven by the recognition that women and 
girls are the bedrock on which social progress is based. It is for this 
reason that Malawi supports the propos al to consider electing a 
female United Nations Secretary General.  
At this juncture, let me express gratitude to all cooperating partners, 
including the UN, who have supported our efforts and initiatives on 
women empowerment, helping us to end child marriages, to reduce 
early pregnancies, to increase school completion rat es for girls, and 
to ensure that increasing numbers of women participate 
meaningfully in our nation’s affairs.  
 
 
 
Madam President,  
- 5 - 
 Humanity’s progress is inseparable from global peace and security, 
for true stability can only be achieved when no one is left behind. Yet, 
we have fallen short in narrowing inequality, as the gap between rich 
and poor nations continues to widen and develo ping countries like 
Malawi struggle with limited fiscal space, limited technology transfer, 
low productivity, and limited participation in global trade. Last year 
we adopted the Pact for the Future , reaffirming our collective 
commitment to inclusive, resil ient, and sustainable global 
governance and development. The Republic of Malawi, therefore, calls 
on the international community to foster an environment that 
supports inclusive growth, ensuring that its benefits reach the most 
vulnerable. To realize this vision, we must strengthen trade and 
investment as engines of prosperity and harness the transformative 
potential of science, technology, artificial intelligence, and private 
sector development for national and global development.  
 
Madam President,  
Climate change stands as the most critical existential threat of our 
era, with its adverse effects disproportionately impacting developing 
nations like Malawi. Despite contributing minimally to global 
greenhouse gas emissions, the Republic of Malawi endure s some of 
the most severe consequences of climate change. The increasing 
frequency and intensity of severe droughts, catastrophic floods, and 
destructive cyclones jeopardize food security by disrupting 
agricultural production, displacing vulnerable communi ties, and 
threatening hard -won developmental advancements.  
- 6 - 
 The Republic of Malawi has lived this reality. Erratic weather 
patterns threaten our agricultural backbone, pushing vulnerable 
communities into food insecurity and economic despair - conditions 
ripe for discord. It is therefore important that our discussion on peace 
must be intrinsically linked to climate resilience, sustainable 
agriculture, and food sovereignty. Sovereignty, just like peace, is 
threatened by food insecurity. We call f or increased investment in 
early warning systems, climate -smart agriculture, and social safety 
nets. A world that is food -secure is a world more peaceful.  
Considering these challenges, Madam President, the Republic of 
Malawi urgently calls for bold and accelerated climate action that 
includes the full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement. 
This involves not only enhanced commitments to reduce emissions 
but also significant scaling up of fin ancial resources dedicated to 
climate adaptation, addressing loss and damage, and ensuring 
equitable access to sustainable technologies. The Republic of Malawi 
firmly believes that only through a collective se nse of responsibility 
and international solidarity can we protect our planet and provide a 
sustainable future for generations to come. Beyond various 
agreements and board room meetings, time for action is now; we 
must act decisively to safeguard both our e nvironment and the 
livelihoods of those most at risk.  
 
Madam President,  
The global community also needs to work together to address public 
health issues. My delegation, therefore, applauds your office for the 
- 7 - 
 efforts that led to the adoption of the political declaration on the 
prevention and control of non -communicable diseases and the 
promotion of mental health and well -being. No nation has been 
spared from the impact of these two health issues, whose causes a re 
numerous. The response to these issues requires concerted efforts 
and collaboration. It is, therefore, rather disheartening that the 
political declaration faced many hurdles during the negotiation 
process. My delegation wishes to appeal for shared commi tment to 
address the issues, and indeed all other emerging public health 
issues.  
 
Madam President,  
In this digital age, Artificial Intelligence presents both unprecedented 
opportunities and profound challenges. If harnessed responsibly, AI 
can accelerate development, improve health and education, and 
unlock economic growth. Yet, without clear governance , it risks 
deepening inequalities and undermining security. We, therefore, call 
for a global framework that ensures AI is ethical, inclusive, and 
accessible to all nations, enabling it to serve as a force for 
development rather than division. The Republic of Malawi is 
optimistic that AI will usher in a new era of enhanced productivity 
for its citizens, helping to propel the country’s development 
trajectory.  
 
Madam President,  
- 8 - 
 Let me take this opportunity to express my gratitude to your office 
for convening a high -level plenary meeting to commemorate the 
Thirtieth Anniversary of the World Programme of Action for Youth. 
The youth make up a large proportion of the population in Ma lawi, 
and indeed in Africa. They are an indispensable force for sustainable 
development. They are leaders, major actors and beneficiaries of 
investments and creators of wealth for today and tomorrow. It is for 
this reason that the government of Malawi deve loped the 2023 -2028 
National Youth Policy to demonstrate its commitment to place young 
people at the center of the national development agenda and to 
undertake reforms which support effective engagement of youth in 
policy development, implementation, and m onitoring in all sectors. 
Two notable areas that the Republic of Malawi has proudly 
championed in relation to youth and development is the Youth, Peace 
and Security Agenda; and Youth Innovation and Entrepreneurship. 
To that end, we are investing in educati on, vocational training, and 
meaningful political and economic participation of our youth. We 
have an inclusive National Peace Architecture that enables women 
and youth to participate as negotiators, mediators and community 
leaders. We have also created a Youth Innovation Fund that supports 
youth innovators and entrepreneurs to realize their dreams. We 
therefore urge the international community to create concrete 
pathways for youth inclusion in political and economic decision -
making processes. Let us invest  in their potential, not just fear their 
energy. To that end, the Republic of Malawi calls for investing for 
peace through a dedicated funding for youth -led peacebuilding.  
 
- 9 - 
 Madam President,  
In closing, the Republic of Malawi reaffirms its unwavering 
commitment to multilateralism and to the central role of the United 
Nations in addressing the pressing challenges of our time. But let us 
be clear: noble mandates alone will not deliver results unless they 
are ma tched by the necessary resources, fairly allocated and 
predictably provided. Let us match our ambition with the resources 
required to deliver. Let us ensure fairness to those who contribute to 
the work of the United Nations. Let us pursue r eforms that 
strengthen accountability and inclusivity. And let us build an 
organization that reflects the diversity of our membership and the 
hopes of our people. In this regard, Madam President,  l would like 
to inform this Assembly that the Republic of Malawi remains resolute 
in her advocacy for equitable representation in the United Nations 
Security Council. This crucial reform is essential as it will ensure that 
diverse voices of capable nation s are heard and considered in the 
decision -making processes t hat impact not just specific regions such 
as the global north or global south, but the entire world. By fostering 
a more inclusive dialogue, we can collectively address pressing global 
challenges and promote a more just and balanced approach to 
internation al governance. No other time is suitable for this reform 
like now.  
 
Madam President,  
As we look beyond 80 years, Malawi envisions a revitalized United 
Nations – one that is agile, inclusive, and responsive to the needs of 
- 10 - 
 developing nations. The challenges of climate change, inequality, and 
digital transformation demand renewed collective action. In the spirit 
of “Better Together,”  we call for a strengthened multilateral system 
that prioritizes peace, sustainable development, and human rights, 
ensuring a thriving planet for our children and grandchildren. 
Malawi stands ready to contribute to this shared vision, guided by 
our Foreign  Policy and the enduring principles of the UN Charter.  
I thank you.  