1 
  
NATIONAL STATEMENT  
BY THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF MALAYSIA  
 
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80 TH SESSION OF THE UNITED  
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY , NEW YORK  
 
27 SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
“BETTER TOGETHER: 80 YEARS AND MORE FOR PEACE, DEVELOPMENT AND HUMAN 
RIGHTS”  
 
Source: NATIONAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF MALAYSIA AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80 TH SESSION 
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY , NEW YORK 27 SEPTEMBER 2025 “BETTER TOGETHER: 80 YEARS AND MORE FOR 
PEACE, DEVELOPMENT AND HUMAN RIGHTS” - Speeches, Statements & International Documents -  Portal  
 
 
Madam President, Your Excellencies.  
1.   May I begin by congratulating President Annalena Baerbock on being elected as the 
President of the 80th session of the General Assembly. 2.  I also wish to thank His Excellency Philemon Yang for his leadership throughout the 79th 
Session of the General Assembly. 3.  It is now the 80th session of the General Assembly. 80 years since our dreams of a bright 
future gave birth to the United Nations.  
4.  Humanity has imagined the future in many ways. Among other things, we imagined that 
in some of its darkest versions, information overload would numb critical thought, while 
apathy takes over.  
5.  I fear that this has come to pass.  

2 
 6.  80 years after the end of the Second World War, we are watching, in high- deﬁnition, as 
genocide unfolds around the world.   
7.  80 years after the fall of the empires, colonialism is still alive. Armed, funded, and 
justiﬁed by some of the supposedly most liberal powers in the world.  
8.  They have defended and supported the only party who has any real power in a conﬂict, 
as it makes a farce out of international law. 
9.  As we approach the 80th anniversary of the United Nations, I suppose I should say, 
‘Congratulations. ’ But today, that word rings hollow.  
10.   Should we congratulate ourselves on our inability to bring an end to the occupation of 
Palestine?  
11.   Or should we congratulate ourselves for allowing a rogue State to undermine our 
Charter and our efforts?  
12.   In Gaza, the clock is ticking, the bombs are falling, and the light is fading. We have 
failed at least 70,000 people.  
13.   Israel can no longer hide behind its pretence of victimhood. From London to Dhaka, 
from Paris to Sydney, from Montreal to Kuala Lumpur, populations have spoken out in grief 
and outrage. More and more people are standing up for the truth: that Israel is committing 
genocide in Gaza.  
14.   Remember: the eyes of the world are upon us. We must take action now. Sanction 
Israel.  
15.   The metastasis of Israel’s brutality in the Middle East cannot go on.  
16.   Their latest assault on Doha was not merely an attack on a few representatives of 
Hamas.  
17.   It was an attack conducted on another State’s soil, and an insult to the efforts of all 
who have attempted to mediate.  
18.   And it is a signal that Israel’s violence will continue to destabilise the region. The 
effects of this will spill over to the rest of the world.  
19.   The atrocities may have begun with Palestine, but they certainly will not end with 
Palestine. As the Middle East grows ever more dangerous for its residents, we will feel the 
reverberations all over the world.   
3 
 20.   And this is why simply advocating for a two -state solution is not enough, Madam 
President. 
21.   Malaysia will agree to any measure of support for the Palestinian people, including the 
New York Declaration.  
22.   But let us be clear. There are only three real answers to this conﬂict:  
        a.  One: To take concrete action against the occupying force.  
        b.  Two: To lend our long -term support to the development of a self -governing 
Palestinian State.  
        c.  And three: To reform the United Nations, and ensure that such a travesty of justice 
never happens again.  
23.   Madam President, repeated failures of the Security Council to fulﬁl the will of the 
General Assembly must be met with strong resistance.  
24.   We must continue to demand accountability from the Permanent Members of the 
UNSC, through Resolution 76/272: the Veto Initiative. 25.   And we must pursue results through Resolution 377A: Uniting for Peace.  
26.   No more shall we quietly accept the dismissal of our collective voice. We must 
question and challenge the veto. We must free the Security Council from this humiliating 
paralysis.  
27.   And we must keep the United Nations a relevant and effective international 
organisation, and global guardian of peace.  
Madam President, 
28.   Over the course of our Chairmanship of ASEAN this year, Malaysia too has learnt of the 
colossal efforts that peace requires.  
29.   As a unique example of an inclusive form of multilateralism, ASEAN has embraced 
change, expanded our membership, and engaged with the world over the past 58 years.  
30.   And this is why it has been Malaysia’s honour, and our greatest task yet, to take on 
Southeast Asia’s challenges this year.  
31.   When conﬂict threatened to spiral between our neighbours, ASEAN did not stand idle. 
32.   We stepped in, convened both sides in Malaysia, and implemented a ceaseﬁre – one 
that ASEAN is now ensuring takes root through active monitoring on the ground.  
4 
 33.   Yes, challenges remain. But our message is clear: ASEAN will stay at the table, urging 
both States to honour their commitments. For there is no conﬂict, whether inter -state or 
intra -state, that is worth risking the stability of our home. 
34.   This is why our efforts to cultivate security and stability in Myanmar, and to restore 
credibility to the Five-Point Consensus, must continue. 
35.   ASEAN is deeply disappointed that the agreed-upon ceaseﬁres in Myanmar have been 
broken in some areas, and that violence continues to endanger civilians.  
36.   Those in power have a responsibility to remember that Myanmar is part of a region, not 
an isolated country. 37.   There is a bright and safe future for all of our peoples if we work together in good faith 
towards a Myanmar -owned, and Myanmar -led, resolution to the crisis in the country. 
38.   As ASEAN’s focus deepens on bolstering security, strengthening economic resilience, 
and advancing sustainability goals across the region, we will address not only our internal 
crises, but also from beyond.  
39.   The South China Sea must not be used as leverage in strategic competition. Never 
again can Southeast Asia and its waters become a theatre for rivalry between the superpowers. 
40.   We therefore urge all parties to fully comply with UNCLOS, and to avoid actions that 
could provoke miscalculation or conﬂict in the waters we share.  
41.   We will also continue to champion the rights and needs of the Global South at large.  
Madam President, 
42.   For far too long, the Global South has borne the brunt of unequal economic policies 
that marginalise and prevent developing nations from participating fairly in the global 
economy.  
43.   And today, the Global South faces a staggering ﬁnancing gap for sustainable 
development, despite being home to the world’s most vulnerable populations.  
44.   The irony is painful: We constitute the world’s majority, yet remain under -represented 
in its decision-making, under -served in development ﬁnancing, and side -lined in global 
governance. 
45.   These imbalances must be corrected. The voices, needs, and aspirations of the Global 
South are not secondary.  
5 
 46.   Remember this: We cannot build a fairer international order without the Global South 
at its centre. Malaysia will continue to advocate for dignity, equity, and opportunity, for all 
developing nations.   
Madam President, Excellencies,  
47.   The UN has served the world for 80 years. But the world we live in is shifting beyond 
any recognition from what it was back then.  
48.   The test that we now face is an existential one. For the question of Palestine has 
haunted the UN for nearly its entire life. 80 years of the United Nations, and 77 years of the 
ethnic cleansing of Palestine. 
49.   I cannot emphasise this enough, Madam President. If we cannot resolve this, the 
citizens of the world will lose faith in us. And in the international order. 50.   Because there is no longer any way to deny that this is modern -day colonisation.   
51.   Only the formerly colonised have been able to see it for what it is since the start.  
52.   And it is genocide, dressed in the cape of Western tolerance.  
53.   For us to remain relevant, we cannot move forward on the habits of the past. We must 
summon the same courage that built this organisation from the ruins of war.  
54.   To conclude, Malaysia believes that three urgent reforms are key to our survival:  
55.   First, we must limit, if not abolish, the veto. And we must challenge it each and every 
time that it is wielded, particularly in cases of crimes against humanity.  
56.   Second, authority must ﬂow back to the General Assembly.  
57.   As the most inclusive body of this house, it should be allowed to serve as the 
conscience and voice of the world, unimpeded. 58.   Third, we must re -design global ﬁnancing mechanisms, to ensure transparency and 
fairness for the Global South. 59.   Reform is no longer a choice. It is our imperative.  
Madam President, 60.   To be “Better Together” , we must change together. Billions of lives depend on whether 
we succeed.   
Thank you  