 
Page 1 of 14  
STATEMENT DELIVERED  
 
BY 
 
HIS EXCELLENCY, KASHIM SHETTIMA, GCON,  
VICE -PRESIDENT, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA,  
DURING  
 
 THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION OF THE 
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
NEW YORK  
THEME:  BETTER TOGETHER: 80 YEARS AND MORE FOR 
PEACE, DEVELOPMENT, AND HUMAN RIGHTS  
 
24th SEPTEMBER 2025  
Check Against Delivery  
Madam President,  

 
Page 2 of 14 Mr. Secretary -General,  
Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,  
Distinguished Delegates,  
 
The chaos that shadows our world is a reminder that we cannot 
afford the luxury of inaction. We would have been consumed by our 
differences had there been no community such as this to remind 
us that we are one human family. Even in our darkest hours, we 
have refused to b e broken. This community was born from the 
ashes of despair, a vehicle for order and for the shared assurance 
that we could not afford to falter again. Our belief in this community 
is not a posture of moral superiority but an undying faith in the 
redemptio n of humanity. It is, therefore, with profound humility that 
I stand before you today, as Vice -President of the Federal Republic 
of Nigeria, to renew this pledge on behalf of my country . 
Madam President,  
1. Nigeria joins the comity of nations in congratulating you on your 
election as President of the General Assembly for the 80th 
Session and assures you of our unalloyed support during your 
tenure. I commend your predecessor, my brother, His 
Excellency, Philémon  Yang,  and the Secretary -General, His 
 
Page 3 of 14 Excellency, António Guterres , for the outstanding stewardship 
and unifying leadership during these extraordinary times.  
 
2. This anniversary must not be a sentimental retreat into nostalgia. 
It must be a moment of truth, a pause to measure where we have 
stumbled and how we might have done better in turning our 
values into action that meets the demands of today.  We are here 
to deliver a world of peace and development, where the respect 
for human rights is paramount. We must recalibrate the delicate 
balance between our roles as sovereign governments and our 
duties as collective partners, to renew multilateralism in a world 
that has evolved far beyond what it was in 1945.   
 
3. The pace of change across borders is a force without pause. It 
manifests in the tools of technology, in the movements of 
information and finance, in the corrosive ideologies that preach 
violence and division, in the gathering storm of the climate 
emergency , and in the tide of irregular migration. We must own 
this process of change. When we speak of nuclear disarmament, 
the proliferation of small weapons, Security Council reform, fair 
access to trade and finance, and the conflicts and human 
suffering across the world, we must recognize the truth. These 
are stains on our collective humanity.  
 
 
Page 4 of 14 4. For all our careful diplomatic language, the slow pace of 
progress on these hardy perennials of the UN General Assembly 
debate has led some to look away from the multilateral model. 
Some years ago, I noticed a shift at this gathering: key events 
were beginning to take place outside this hall, and the most 
sought -after voices were no longer heads of state. These are 
troubling signs. Nigeria remains firmly convinced of the merits of 
multilateralism, but to sustain that conviction, we must show that 
existing structure s are not set in stone. We must make real 
change, change that works, and change that is seen to work. If 
we fail, the direction of travel is already predictable.  
 
5. We are here to strengthen the prospects for peace, development 
and human rights. Madam President, I want to make four points 
today to outline how we can do this :  
 One: Nigeria must have a permanent seat at the UN Security 
Council. This should take place as part of a wider process of 
institutional reform.  
 Two : We need urgent action ⁠⁠to promote sovereign debt 
relief and access to trade and financing.  
 Three : Countries that host minerals must benefit from those 
minerals.  
 
Page 5 of 14  Four : The digital divide must close. As our friend the 
Secretary General has said: ‘A.I.’ must stand for ‘Africa Included’.  
6. On my first point: the United Nations will recover its relevance 
only when it reflects the world as it is, not as it was. Nigeria’s 
journey tells this story with clarity: when the UN was founded, 
we were a colony of 20 million people, absent from the tables 
where decisions a bout our fate were taken; today, we are a 
sovereign nation of over 236 million, projected to be the third 
most populous country in the world, with one of the youngest and 
most dynamic populations on earth. A stabilising force in 
regional security and a con sistent partner in global 
peacekeeping, our case for permanent seat at the Security 
Council is a demand for fairness, for representation, and for 
reform that restores credibility to the very institution upon which 
the hope of multilateralism rests.  
 
7. This is why Nigeria stands firmly behind the UN80 Initiative of 
the Secretary -General, and the resolution adopted by this 
Assembly on 18 July 2025, a bold step to reform the wider United 
Nations system for greater relevance, efficiency, and 
effectiveness i n the face of unprecedented financial strain. We 
support the drive to rationalise structures and end the duplication 
of responsibilities and programmes, so that this institution may 
speak with one voice and act with greater coherence.  
 
Page 6 of 14 Madam President,   
8. None of us can achieve a peaceful world in isolation. This is the 
heavy burden of sovereignty. Sovereignty is a covenant of 
shared responsibility, a recognition that our survival is bound to 
the survival of others. To live up to this charge, we must walk 
hand in hand with our neighbours and partners. We must follow 
the trails of weapons, of money, and of people. For these forces, 
too often driven by faceless non -state actors, ignite the fires of 
conflict across our region.  
Madam President,  
9. Nigeria’s soldiers and civilians carry a proud legacy . They have 
participated in 51 out of 60 United Nations peacekeeping 
operations since our independence in 1960. We have stood with 
our partners in Africa to resolve conflicts, and we continue that 
commitment today through the Multinational Joint Task Force. At 
home, we confront the scourge of insurgency with resolve. From 
this long and difficult struggle with violent extremism, one truth 
stands clear: military tactics may win battles measured in months 
and years, but in wars that span generations, it is values and 
ideas that deliver the ultimate victory.  
 
10.  We are despised by terrorists because we choose tolerance 
over tyranny . Their ambition is to divide us and to poison our 
 
Page 7 of 14 humanity with a toxic rhetoric of hate. Our difference is the 
distance between shadow and light, between despair and hope, 
between the ruin of anarchy and the promise of order. We do not 
only fight wars, we feed and shelter the innocent victims of war. 
This is why we are not indifferent to the devastations of our 
neighbours , near and distant. This is why we speak of the 
violence and aggression visited upon innocent civilians in Gaza, 
the illegal attack on Qatar, and the tensions that scar the wider 
region. It is not only because of the culture of impunity that 
makes such act s intolerable, but because our own bitter 
experience has taught us that such violence never ends where 
it begins.  
 
11. We do not believe that the sanctity of human life should be 
trapped in the corridors of endless debate. That is why we say, 
without stuttering  and without doubt, that a two -state solution 
remains the most dignified path to lasting peace for the people 
of Palestine . For too long, this community has borne the weight 
of moral conflict. For too long, we have been caught in the 
crossfire of violence that offends the conscience of humanity. 
We come not as partisans, but as peacemakers. We come as 
brothers and sisters of a shared world , a world that must never 
reduce the right to live into the currency of devious politics. The 
people of Palestine are not collateral damage in a civilisation  
 
Page 8 of 14 searching for order. They are human beings, equal in worth, 
entitled to the same freedoms and dignities that the rest of us 
take for granted.  
 
12. We want to make the choice crystal clear: civilised values over 
fear, civilised values over vengeance, civilised values over 
bloodshed. We show the opportunities that peace brings, just as 
the extremist hopes to drive apart rival communities and different 
religions. We work through multilateral platforms within the rule 
of law, to build the consensus and support that makes this 
immensely difficult and dangerous task that much easier. This is 
how we deny our enemies the space they crave to fuel tension 
and d espair. It is our experience that this offers the best, perhaps 
only hope for peace, reconciliation and victory for the civilised 
values of a shared humanity. Nigeria, as a diverse country, also 
recognises the variable geometry of Democracy, its different 
forms and speeds. For this reason, we are working with the 
United Nations to strengthen Democratic institutions in our 
region and beyond, through the Regional Partnership for 
Democracy.  
Madam President,  
13. Point two: the price of peace is eternal vigilance. The 
increasingly difficult security outlook has prompted many 
 
Page 9 of 14 Member States to count the cost of the emerging world order. 
We in Nigeria are already familiar with such difficult choices: 
infrastructure renewal or defence platforms? schools or tanks? 
Our view is that the path to sustainable peace lies in growth and 
prosperity. The government has taken difficult but necessary 
steps to restructure our economy and remove distortions, 
including subsidies and currency controls that benefited the few 
at the expense of the many.  
 
14. I believe in the power of the market to transform. Our task is 
to enable and facilitate, and to trust in the ingenuity and 
enterprise of the people. But the process of transition is difficult 
and brings unavoidable hardship. This year, we held the 
inaugura l West Africa Economic Summit in Abuja to bring 
investors and opportunities together. The results exceeded our 
expectations and are a clear indication of what innovation can 
deliver.  
 
15. It is in that same spirit of dynamic review that I invite the United 
Nations to re -examine the best use of scarce resources. One 
critical area is climate change. It is not an abstract issue about 
an indeterminate fate, to be settled at some distant point i n the 
future. It is not even solely an environmental issue. It is about 
national, regional, and international security. It is about irregular 
 
Page 10 of 14 migration. Truly, this is an “everyone issue.” We are all 
stakeholders, and we are all beneficiaries of the best outcomes.  
 
Madam President,  
16. This is why relevant Ministers have been instructed to work 
with the UN to make the best use of climate funds. We believe 
there are huge, shared dividends to accrue from increased 
support for education, for resilient housing, for access to 
technology and financing to allow vulnerable communities to 
thrive: to become part of solutions, rather than problems.  
 
17. Nigeria and Africa have made significant strides in recent 
years to put our affairs in order. We can take that progress to the 
next level, a level that presents new opportunities for trade, 
investment and profit, if we can access reforms to strengthen the 
international financial architecture. We need urgent action to 
promote debt relief - not as an act of charity but as a clear path 
to the peace and prosperity that benefits us all.  
 
18. I am calling for new and binding mechanism to manage 
sovereign debt, a sort of International Court of Justice for money, 
that will allow emerging economies to escape the economic 
straitjacket of primary production of unprocessed exports.  
 
Page 11 of 14  
19. It has been over for decades since the Lagos Action Plan 
outlined a route away from debt and dependence that 
highlighted opportunities, that today should still be explored for 
local added value for processing and manufacturing in 
everything from agriculture to solid minerals and petrochemicals. 
The African Continental Free Trade Area is a remarkable 
achievement of co -operation. We remain fully committed to the 
achievement of SDGs – and are convinced this can be best 
delivered by focusing principally on our primary mission of 
growth and prosperity.  
Madam President,  
20. Our third point. We welcome steps to move towards peace in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo. We agree that international 
investment and engagement offer a way out of the cycle of decay 
and violence. Access to strategic minerals, from Sierra Leone in 
the 1990s and Sudan today, has for too long been a source of 
conflict rather than prosperity. Africa – and I must include Niger ia 
– has in abundance the critical minerals that will drive the 
technologies of the future. Investment in exploration, 
development and processing of these minerals, in Africa, will 
diversify supply to the international market, reduce tensions 
between major  economies and help shape the architecture for 
 
Page 12 of 14 peace and prosperity, on a continent that too often in the past 
has been left behind by the rivalries and competition between 
different blocs.  
 
21. We know in Nigeria, that we are more stable when those 
communities that have access to key resources are able to 
benefit from those resources. This has been our journey in the 
oil producing region of the Niger Delta. I believe that we will 
strengthen the i nternational order, when those countries that 
produce strategic minerals benefit fairly from those minerals - in 
terms of investment, partnership, local processing and jobs. 
When we export raw materials, as we have been doing, tension, 
inequality and insta bility fester.  
Madam President,  
22. The fourth pillar for change that I am advocating, is a 
dedicated initiative, bringing together researchers, private 
sector, governments and communities, to close the digital divide. 
As we stand on the threshold of new and dramatic technological 
change, we  are still absorbing the impact of the revolution in 
information and communication of the past 20 years.  We 
understand better than we did, the opportunities technology 
offers as well as the safeguards we need to enable growth and 
mitigate the potential fo r corrosion. Some worry about fake 
 
Page 13 of 14 news. We have plenty of that, with the potential of devastating 
real-world consequences in countries rich and poor. I am more 
worried about an emerging generation that grows ever more 
cynical, because it believes nothing and trusts less. As 
technology shak es up public administration, law, finance, conflict 
and so much of the human condition, I am calling for a new 
dialogue, to ensure we promote the best of the opportunities that 
are arising - and promote the level of access that allows 
emerging economies mo re quickly, to close a wealth and 
knowledge gap that is in no one’s interest.  
 
23. I join you today to reassert that Nigeria’s commitment to 
peace, to development, to unity, to multilateralism, and to the 
defence of human rights is beyond compromise. For none of us 
is safe until all of us are safe. The road ahead will not be easy, 
and we  know there are no quick fixes to the trials that test the 
human spirit. Yet history reminds us that bold action in pursuit of 
noble ideals has always defined the story of the United Nations. 
Time and again, we have found the wisdom to balance sovereign 
rights with collective responsibility. That balance is once again 
in question, but I believe that a renewed commitment to 
multilateralism, not as a slogan but as an article of faith, remains 
our surest path forward. Nigeria dedicates itself fully and without  
reservation to that noble cause.  
 
Page 14 of 14  
24. I thank you.  