 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  1  
STATEMENT  
by H.E. Mr. Dick Schoof, Prime Minister of the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands  
General Debate of the 80th Session of the United 
Nations General Assembly  
25 September 2025, New York  
Check against delivery  
 
Mr President,  
Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Back in 1947, a seven -year-old Dutch boy called Dirk 
Salomons and his father made a long car journey to 
the German city of Cologne.  
When they arrived, Dirk couldn’t believe his eyes.  
‘It was a shocking sight,’ he said in a recent 
newspaper interview. ‘Rubble everywhere , people 
living in abject poverty, the entire city flattened by 
bombing.’  
Today, almost 80 years later, those images are still 
seared in Dirk’s memory.  
And that was precisely his father’s intention.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  2  
‘He wanted to show me what war can do to a city,’ he 
recalled in the interview.  
 ‘At the same time, ’ he added, ‘ we were also hearing 
radio reports about the establishment of the  United 
Nations in New York. All my father’s hope w as 
invested in that.’  
When the interviewer asked what exactly that hope 
was based on, Dirk recalled the opening words of the 
United Nations Charter:  
‘We the peoples…’  
And indeed,  it is the peoples  of the world  – the 
people-  who task their governments with saving 
them from war, human rights violations and armed 
conflicts.  
 
We, the peoples.  
It was those words, on that day in Cologne, that 
inspired Dirk Salomons  to embark on a career as a 
UN diplomat  that spanned almost 30 years.  
And it is those same words, 80 years on from the UN 
Charter, that still remind him – and us – of that task.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  3  
Of course, the world has changed dramatically  since 
then. 
And unfortunately , we must acknowledge that the 
mission – no more war – has failed.  
In fact, this year – even as we celebrate the United 
Nations’ 80th anniversary – we have heard it said that 
the UN can no longer justify  its existence.  
Anyone who says that, however, has forgotten where 
we came  from.  
 
Without the UN, there would be no disarmament 
treaties.  
No International Court of Justice.  
No climate agreements  or Sustainable Development 
Goals.  
Without the UN – which is often the only organisation 
capable of supplying aid in the toughest places on 
earth- millions of people would be deprived of food.  
Clean water.  
And medical aid.  
 
Over the past 80 years , we’ve take n the UN’s 
achievements for granted. 
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  4 We’ve neglected to look back on where we’ve come 
from and all the milestone s we’ve achieved along the 
way. 
And although the situation  right now might be 
especially difficult, I know this too: it  has never been 
easy.  
 
 
 
Every achievement was preceded by lengthy 
consultations.  
Countries were often at loggerheads . 
And sometimes it was tempting to throw in the 
towel.  
But that never happened.  
And the reason can only be that, despite our many 
differences, we all understand what’s at stake.  
 
That’s the  context in which I view the increasingly 
frank debate on the UN’s future.  
Yes, the world has changed.  
Yes, international relations have changed.  
And yes, the way we work together has changed.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  5 But I believe that can lead us to only one conclusion: 
that we must change with the times . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And that’s exactly what we’re doing, through 
initiatives like UN80, which aims to enhance the 
UN’s impact on the ground, simplify its structure and 
forge stronger partnerships with other bodies .  
Like international financial institutions,  the private 
sector and philanthropic organisations . 
 
Changing with the times , also means making the 
most of today’s opportunities.  
Such as using AI and other technologies wherever 
we can.  
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is already taking the 
lead on this, by teaming up with donors and partners 
to explore new ways of boosting the efficiency and 
effectiveness of multilateral institutions.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New ways.  
But not new principles . 
Because the guiding principles , as laid down in the 
UN Charter 80 years ago , remain unchanged.  
And today I’d like to reflect with you on the most 
important one of all...  
The protection  of the international legal order . 
Back then, that inspired everything we stand for 
today.  
Leading to a multilateral system of agreements.  
And providing a  powerful counterweight to the idea 
that might is right.  
  
In my part of the world, all was well  for a long time.  
But now we know that this  is not a given.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  7 We’ve seen that in Ukraine, whose people have been 
suffering under Russian attacks for three and a half 
years now.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
As Ukrainian troops continue fighting every day to 
protect their country, their families  and their right to 
self-determination, people in the areas occupied by 
Russia are enduring systematic oppression and 
grave human rights violations  on a daily basis . 
We’ve seen  several initiatives  aimed at bringing 
peace closer since the spring, such as  talks in Saudi 
Arabia, Türkiye and the US .  
But peace still seems like a very distant prospect.  
Ukraine has adopted a constructive stance, but so 
far Russia has shown no genuine willingness to 
accept the US proposals.  
And in the meantime, the war of aggression and the 
suffering continue unabated . 
 
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  8 But in case you’re thinking  ‘there goes  another 
European who only wants to talk about European 
problems ’, let me assure you: that is  not the case.  
If the UN’s 80 years have taught us  anything,  it’s that 
all the big issues are closely interlinked. 
 
 
 
As a Kingdom of different countries in different parts 
of the world, we know that better than anyone.  
Take food security.  
In the European part of our Kingdom , we’re 
approaching the limits of what the earth can sustain. 
While the Caribbean part of the Kingdom has seen 
how vulnerable people are when they’re dependent 
on others for their food security.  
 
And then there are  those other matters that we hear 
far too little about, even though they give cause for 
grave concern . 
Just look at  what’s happening in Sudan.  
Since April 2023 , more than 150,000 people have 
been killed, and 14 million more have had to flee 
their homes.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  9 All trade routes and aid corridors have been cut  off, 
so for the past year humanitarian organisations have 
been unable to provide more aid.   
As a result, half the Sudanese population is living 
with the reality of food insecurity.  
And in parts of Darfur and Kordofan, a famine has 
been declared.  
 
This has to stop.  
The Netherlands, together with the EU and donor 
countries, is therefore calling on all the warring 
parties to respect international law and allow 
humanitarian aid to reach those who need it.  
 
The Netherlands will continue supporting these 
humanitarian efforts for Sudan.  
Not only by working via the UN and the Red Cross, 
but also by giving 16 million euros to the Sudan 
Humanitarian Fund this year .  
And almost seven million euros to the Dutch Relief 
Alliance in Sudan.  
 
As I’ve said, the horrors unfolding in Sudan have 
barely registered in the outside world.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  10 The same cannot be said of the horrors unfolding  in 
Gaza.  
Every day we see more heartbreaking images 
emerging from the region.  
Images we scarcely thought possible. 
Images that defy our understanding and even our 
faith in humanity.  
There is only one appropriate respons e: this war, this 
suffering must end now. 
That starts with the safe, unimpeded  and unlimited 
access of humanitarian aid for the suffering people 
of Gaza.  
Including UN aid.  
 
In addition we will continue, at both national and 
European level, to urge the Israeli government to 
drastically change its course.  
For example , we’re supporting the European 
Commission’s proposal to restrict investment in 
Israeli companies that develop dual -use 
technologies.  
And we’re also  stating clearly that we want to 
suspend the EU -Israel Association Agreement, 
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  11 refuse goods from illegal settlements and stop 
issuing export licences for arms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the same time, these actions must not obscure 
another truth. 
Hamas is a terrorist organisation that must lay down 
its arms.  
There is no place for Hamas in the future governance 
of the Gaza Strip.   
What’s more, the only route to a lasting peace , is 
through negotiations that ultimately lead to a two -
state solution.  
With the signing of the New York Declaration  [this 
High Level Week] , including by the Netherlands,  we 
are taking a step on the path to a lasting peace.  
 
 
 
 
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
As I come to the end of my remarks , I realise – as I’m 
sure you do, too –  how much work still needs to be 
done.  
How many areas in which we – the UN – have fallen 
short.  
And how long we have waited  to adapt to this 
changing world . 
So I understand that some of us may be tempted to  
give in to despair.  
And yet, we can’t allow that.  
Because 80 years ago, a Dutch boy stood hand in 
hand with his father amid the ruins of Cologne.  
And in that wasteland appeared a glimmer of hope, 
sparked by what had happened here in New York.  
 
AVT/AZ-250915-002  13 A glimmer of hope that inspired  Dirk Salomons.  
And his father.  
And the peoples of these United Nations.  
We, the peoples.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 