1 
  
 
 
Statement by H.E . Mr. Lok Bahadur 
Thapa, Ambassador/Permanent 
Representative of Nepal to the 
United Nations and  
The  Leader of  the Nepali Delegation  
at  
The General Debate of the 80th Session 
of the United Nations General 
Assembly  
 
New York, 26 September 2025  
Theme: ‘Better Together: 80 Years and More  
for Peace, Development and Human Rights’  
 

2 
 Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
Distinguished Delegates,  
 
It is my honor to address this august Assembly.  
At the outset, allow me to extend warm greetings from  
Nepal, the land of Sagarmatha  (Mt. Everest) , the 
highest mountain in the world, and the birthplace of 
Lord Buddha, the apostle of peace and compassion.  
I congratulate Her Excellency Annalena Baerbock  on 
her election  as the President of the 80th Session of the 
General Assembly. I assure her of Nepal’s full 
support.  
I also extend our appreciation to Secretary -General 
António Guterres for his steadfast leadership in these 
challenging times.  
 
 
 
3 
 Madam President,  
 
First, let me  share about the recent political 
developments in Nepal.  
Earlier this month, Nepali youth , particularly Gen -Z, 
took to the streets with a clear and compelling voice 
for change.  
Their call was not for narrow interests, but for a 
nation built on the pillars of good governance - 
transparent, accountable, and responsive to the 
people.  
They demanded efficient public service, an end to 
corruption, an equitable society, justice for all, and 
dignified job opportunities for the youth.  
It was a resounding reminder that the aspirations of 
this generation are nothing less than a fair, just, and 
prosperous Nepal  
In the Gen -Z movement, we saw unfortunate violence 
that claimed lives and left deep scars in our society.  
Many government buildings were reduced to ashes.  
4 
 An interim government has been formed to steer 
Nepal’s political direction at this critical moment.  
For the first time in Nepal’s history, Nepal is led by a 
woman as Prime Minister - herself a former Chief 
Justice.  
General elections have been slated for the 5th of March 
2026.  
This will mark another step in strengthening our 
democracy through fresh mandates of the sovereign 
people.   
Rebuilding our institutions, restoring trust, and 
healing our society will take time, resources, and 
solidarity.  
Truly, Nepal stands at a historical crossroads.  
And we know that the only viable road ahead of us is 
that of the road to peace, democracy, and inclusive 
development.    
We are determined to continue our democratic 
journey.  
5 
 And we appreciate goodwill and continued support 
from the international community as we move 
forward in this direction.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The world itself stands at a crossroads.  
Peace is in peril.  
Militarization is mounting.  
Development is drifting  
And the climate crisis is culminating.  
We have seen commitments unmet and promises 
unkept.  
In this context, the theme of this Session – “Better 
Together: 80 Years and More for Peace, Development 
and Human Rights”  –could not be more relevant.  
 
 
6 
 Madam President,  
 
For 80 years, the United Nations has served as a 
common foundation for multilateralism . 
A foundation upon which all nations – big and small, 
developed and developing – stand equal and forge 
common solutions.  
For 80 years, our organization has remained a beacon 
of hope – 
–Hope for peace.  
–Hope for shared prosperity.  
–Hope for equity, justice, freedom, and human 
rights.  
–And, hope for the rules -based international 
order.   
And today, as crises converge – from climate 
catastrophe to widening inequality, from digital 
disruption to violent conflict s– that beacon must 
shine brighter than ever.  
7 
 It is time to renew our collective resolve to fortify the 
founding values of the United Nations.  
 
Madam President,   
 
Nepal attaches profound and enduring value to the 
United Nations.  
The UN Charter is a bedrock of our foreign policy.  
It is a compass that guides our action on the global 
stage.  
This reflects Nepal’s enduring belief in 
multilateralism, international cooperation, and 
global solidarity –principles that define who we are as 
a nation.  
This year marks 70 years since Nepal joined the 
United Nations . 
For seven decades, Nepal has consistently stood by 
the U nited Nations:  
–Contributing to global  peace and stability,  
8 
 –Advocating for a rules-based international 
order,  
–Promoting equitable and sustainable economic 
development, particularly for the upliftment of 
Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and 
Landlocked Developing Countries ( LLDCs ), and  
–Upholding  human dignity and justice.  
Today, Nepal proudly stands as the largest troop -
contributing country.  
Our highly professional peacekeepers serve with a 
deep sense of duty to secure peace and stability in the 
conflict -ridden parts of the world.  
Nepal remains a steadfast advocate for complete and 
general disarmament.  
The lasting peace and a safer world depend on the 
reduction of all weapons, conventional and emerging 
alike.  
Nepal  strongly condemns  terrorism in all its forms 
and manifestations.  
We stand for peace, security, and the protection of 
innocent lives everywhere.  
9 
 As the Chair of the  Global Coordination Bureau of the  
Least Developed Countries, Nepal is leading the 
group to ensure equitable, inclusive , and sustainable 
development guided by the spirit of no one is left 
behind.  
As Co -Facilitator of  the Fourth International 
Conference on Financing for Development, held in 
Seville, Spain,  Nepal contributed to advancing key 
priorities:  
-Catalyzing investments for sustainable 
development,  
-Addressing the debt crisis,  
-Reforming the international financial 
architecture, and  
-Revitalizing multilateral cooperation.  
Nepal is deeply honored to serve as the President of 
the Economic and Social Council this session.  
We thank the Member States for their trust .  
As the President of the ECOSOC, I am  deeply 
committed , under the motto of ‘Delivering Better’, to 
bring coherence, credibility, and measurable impact 
to the Council’s work .  
10 
 As a member of the UN Peacebuilding Commission, 
Nepal is deeply committed to supporting inclusive, 
nationally owned, and locally driven peacebuilding 
processes.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The world today faces challenges of profound gravity 
and urgency.  
Many parts of the world are witnessing protracted 
crises.  
War  is raging relentlessly in Ukraine.  
Suffering is deepening in Gaza, where civilians bear 
the heaviest toll.  
We support a two -state solution, where Israel and 
Palestine coexist peacefully and securely within 
internationally recognized borders in line with the 
relevant United Nations resolutions.  
Nepal is deeply concerned about  the innocent 
civilians held hostage by Hamas.  
11 
 We call for the immediate release of Bipin Joshi, a 
Nepali student, who has been held hostage by Hamas 
since October 7, 2023.  
Crises in Sudan, the Sahel , and beyond have left 
millions displaced, hungry , and vulnerable.  
The architecture of global peace has been  under 
severe pressure unseen since the Second World War.  
Institutions designed to prevent conflict and uphold 
human dignity are tested as never before.  
It is frustrating that the defence budget is 
skyrocketing while development cooperation is 
shrinking.  
Global military spending has reached unprecedented 
levels -2.7 trillion US dollars  in 2024, the highest 
since the Cold War.  
We have witnessed gross violations of human rights 
in various parts of the world.  
Children and the most vulnerable are caught in the 
crossfire.  
 
12 
 Climate -driven disasters are compound ing human 
suffering : 
-Deepening vulnerabilities,  
-Displacing communities, and  
-Straining already fragile systems.  
The very institutions we built to confront these global 
challenges are under immense strain.  
 
Confidence in multilateral frameworks is 
weakening.    
This is a clear and urgent call  
–To reassess, strengthen, and revitalize our  
multilateral institutions, and  
–To fortify global solidarity and action.  
  
Madam President,  
 
Let me highlight a few areas that deserve urgent 
global attention . 
13 
  
First,  peace and security.  
Beyond words, peace demands action.  
It demands courage.  
And, it demands commitment.  
In these turbulent times, dialogue must triumph over 
hostility , diplomacy over conflict, and cooperation 
over division . 
We must take urgent and coordinated actions to 
prevent conflict, uphold justice, and foster inclusive 
development.   
It is incumbent upon us to  address the root causes of 
conflicts, including poverty, inequality, and 
marginalization.   
 
Second,  we must  strengthen  multilateralism and 
rebuild trust.  
Multilateral institutions must deliver . 
Not just promises, but results.  
14 
 They must be representative, transparent , and 
accountable.  
In this interdependent world, no single nation – 
however rich and powerful – can resolve global 
problems  alone.   
We must uphold multilateralism for fostering global 
cooperation and coordination.   
We must repose our trust in multilateralism , 
anchored in sovereign equality, territorial integrity, 
and national independence.  
 
Third,  accelerating the implementation of the 2030 
Agenda  is critical.  
As the progress on the Sustainable Development 
Goals is far off track, the world must act with greater 
urgency and solidarity.  
We strongly call for the timely and effective 
implementation of the Compromiso de Sevilla.  
Sustainable investment must be boosted to deliver on 
our promises.  
15 
 Development assistance is critical for making 
progress in sustainable development.  
We appreciate the developed countries that meet the 
ODA target and strongly urge others to fulfill the 
commitment.  
We must make development finance adequate, easily 
accessible, predictable, and aligned with national 
priorities.  
Institutional and human capacity -building support 
tailored to the needs and priorities of the countries, 
particularly in the Global South, should be 
prioritized.  
We must reform trade systems to be fair, inclusive, 
and responsive to developing countries.  
It is incumbent upon us to address the debt burdens 
facing many developing countries.  
Debt relief, including debt structuring and debt 
swaps, should be scaled up to ease debt distress.  
Priority should be given to inclusive development.  
We must invest in youth and promote gender equality 
and empowerment of women and girls.  
16 
 The rights, safety , and dignity of migrant workers 
must be fully respected and protected.  
 
Fourth,  climate justice and climate action.   
Climate change has disproportionately affected 
vulnerable populations, such as low -income 
communities and developing nations.   
Nepal is deeply concerned about  the disproportionate 
impact of climate change, particularly in the 
mountain regions.  
We have firsthand experience of glaciers melting in 
our Himalayas that are seriously threatening the lives 
and livelihoods of millions downstream.  
To discuss the climate crisis and chart out the way 
forward, we convened the Sagarmatha Sambaad  (Mt. 
Everest Dialogue)  in May this year under the theme 
‘Climate Change, Mountains and the Future of 
Humanity '.  
The Sambaad adopted the  Sagarmatha Call for 
Action , reaffirming our shared commitment to the 
Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda.  
17 
 Nepal is proud to be among the few countries to have 
submitted our third Nationally Determined 
Contribution —NDC3.  
 
By 2035, we aim to reduce emissions by nearly 27% 
and expand  renewable energy eightfold . 
 
Excellencies,  as the world confronts a climate 
catastrophe, we must act with urgency and resolve.  
 
This is not just a crisis of emissions —it is a crisis of 
equity, of survival, of justice.  
Nepal calls for urgent, fair , and ambitious action to 
protect vulnerable communities.  
Polluters must take responsibility  with actions.  
We reiterate our call for scaled -up, predictable and 
accessible  climate finance, technology transfer, and 
capacity -building for countries on the frontline - 
particularly  the Least Developed Countries and 
mountainous nations.  
The Loss and Damage Fund must be capitalized, and 
biodiversity finance must be increased to match the 
scale of the crisis.  
18 
 Nepal urges the international community —especially 
developed countries —to demonstrate genuine 
solidarity and moral clarity by delivering on the ICJ 
Advisory Opinion and upholding their obligations to 
protect the climate system.  
 
Fifth,  digital transformation.  
Technology must be inclusive, secure, and rights -
based .  
We must narrow the digital divide within and among 
countries to create a peaceful and equitable society.  
Nepal advocates for a global digital cooperation 
framework that ensures access to infrastructure, 
digital literacy, and data protection for all.  
Technology transfer must be accelerated and scaled 
up. 
 
Finally,  the United Nations must be reformed to 
reflect present -day realities.   
19 
 Focus should be laid on coherence, coordination, and 
accountability across the UN development system.  
We need to prioritize LDCs and LLDCs across all 
global commitments and partnerships.  
The UN80 initiative offers a timely opportunity to 
renew our collective commitment to a more inclusive, 
transparent, and effective multilateral system.  
Nepal supports the reform of the United Nations 
Security Council to make it more representative, 
transparent, and accountable.  
The review of ECOSOC and the High -Level Political 
Forum this year presents an important moment to 
enhance their effectiveness, coherence, and impact in 
delivering on the Sustainable Development Goals.  
Similarly, Nepal supports the ongoing Peacebuilding 
Architecture Review (PBAR).   
This is an opportunity to enhance  synergy, streamlin e 
efforts, and driv e results where they matter most.  
We also underline that the global financial 
architecture must meet today’s realities.  
 
20 
 Madam President , 
 
The global community has, time and again, 
reaffirmed its determination to tackle challenges 
before us.  
And, we have shown that we can achieve more – 
–When we act in genuine partnership,  
–When we choose collaboration over 
confrontation,  
–When we replace disagreements with dialogue,  
–And when we are truly committed to peace, 
prosperity, and a sustainable future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 Madam President,  
Excellencies,  
Distinguished Delegates  
 
For eight decades, the  United Nations has stood as a 
beacon of hope for peace, for justice, for human 
rights, and for development.  
Today, that legacy calls upon us more urgently than 
ever.  
The world watches us at a moment of great trial.  
Let us stand together, united and determined, 
to ensure enduring peace and prosperity in the 
world.   
When the United Nations succeeds, humanity as a 
whole succeeds . 
When it falters, it is the innocent and the vulnerable 
who bear the heaviest cost.  
Let this 80th anniversary remind us of our shared 
duty:  
22 
 To safeguard peace  
To uphold justice  
To protect human dignity, and  
To build a world that is fairer, safer, and more 
humane for all.  
Nepal stands firmly committed to doing its part in 
shaping a safer, more prosperous, and more 
sustainable world . 
I thank you.   
 