New Zealand Na tional Statement to the UN General Assembly – 
‘Leadership , Global Affairs  & the United Nations ’ 
 
Madam President  
Twelve months ago, when delivering New Zealand’s national statement, 
we said that never has it been more apparent just how much political 
leadership is required to respond to the international challenges  we face.  
Political l eadership is needed to restore trust in our domestic and 
international institutions , forge unity, maintain fragile social cohesion, and 
fill the gaps when the international community, through the United Nations, 
prove s unable to.   
Traversing events during  the past year,  that leadership gap has only 
grown.  The international order that has sustained peace for the past 80 
years stands on the precipice of breaking down.  
The shift in the international order from rules to power continue s its 
malignant path while the Security Council is effectively paral ysed on many 
of the acute geopolitical challenges  it faces . This inability to act  – largely 
a product of the veto power by the ‘Permanent Five’ – impacts deeply on 
perceptions of the U nited Nation s’ broader legitimacy.  
And f or a small state like New Zealand, whose security and prosperity for 
the past 80 years has relied  on a functioning  multi lateral  system, the 
erosion of that system is hugely troubling , and costly . 
The United Nations , as an organisation , has grown enormously since its 
creation  eight decades ago . But its effectiveness has not kept pace  with 
this growth , so it has found  itself a bigger  target  from those who question 
the breadth  of its ambit ions or from those who want to weaken  the 
multilateral  system  that it leads .  
The United Nations’ reform effort needs to  rise to the scale  of its current 
structural , fiscal , and geo political  challenges .  
We will play our part , as co -chair of the mandate implementation review , 
because New Zealand, as a small state, want s the United Nations to carry 
out bold reform s that can restore its standing  with member states .  
New Zealand is deeply troubled by the humanitarian disasters  we see 
globally . While the international community ’s focus is rightly  dominat ed by 
the suffering  in Gaza  and Ukraine , humanitarian crises in countries  like 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Syria, Sudan and Myanmar lead us to 
a deeper concern . 
Our concern is that the effects of  large -scale violence, displacement, and 
famine  will create further  inter-generational cycle s of violence  in countrie s 
already wracked by political  instability  and conflict . 
Nearly 17 million people require hu manitarian aid in Syria, with a similarly 
large number displaced.  Over  21 million Congolese require humanitarian 
support.    
In Sudan, more than  30 million people , some  65 percent of its population, 
require urgent humanitarian aid and protection. Basic services have 
collapsed, vaccination rates plummeted , and violence , including sexual 
violence,  are endemic.  Some  13 million Sudanese people have been 
displaced  from their homes . 
In Myanmar, over 3.5 million people are internally displaced and 22 million 
in need of humanitarian assistance , making it the worst humanitarian 
crisis in Southeast Asia.  
These bald numbers are shocking  to contemplate because they say that 
in too many places our shared humanity is held in  contempt , or worse . 
We need  leadership  that creates possibilities, not extinguish es them.    
Leadership  that persuades rather than controls . 
And l eadership that appeals to our better angels, not our worst instincts.  
We most of all need  leadership that meets the common desire for shelter, 
sustenance , to live in peace, feel secure,  and live with the hope that their 
children will flourish.    
Most of all, we need leadership that is courageous.  
It was courage ous leadership  that saw Egyptian President Anwar Sadat 
address the Israeli Knesset in Jerusalem, in November 1977 , to extol 
peace . Sadat would pay  the ultimate sacrifice  for his courage but his 
country and Israel have benefitted from his courage  in the decades since.  
In that speech, Sadat  said: ‘the struggle which took us from war to war, 
from victims to more victims, until you and we have today reached the 
edge of a horrible abyss and a terrifying disaster unless , together, we 
seize this opportunity today of a durable peace based on justice ’.    
We are again on the edge of a horr ible abyss in Gaza. But where , we ask , 
is the quality of leadership that can pull Israel is and Palestinians back from 
the abyss to project hope to the victims of  this intolerable  violence ?  
Because without hope, the cycles of violence that fuel and perpetuate this 
never -ending conflict will not end. It will  instead be a terrorist breeding 
ground , creatin g the next generation  of recruits  for those who only hate .  
That is the current context for the New Zealand Government c onsidering  
the vexed question of Palestinian statehood . 
New Zealand is a n enduring  supporter of the two -state solution and 
Palestinian self -determination. Our long-standing policy is that Palestinian 
state recognition is a matter of when, not if.  
We noted announcements by some countries in July and August that they  
intend ed to recognise Palestinian statehood this week , now confirmed . 
We have  also closely observed the Israeli Government’s actions in Gaza 
and on the West Bank following those earlier announcements . 
And we have listened carefully to the arguments made earlier this week 
at the ‘Two State Solution Conference’.   
Palestinian s tatehood recognition  is, however,  uniquely complicated  given  
it is embedded in a  seemingly  intractable , never -ending  conflict  situation . 
Very few New Zealanders  can recall any period of sustained peace in the 
Middle East during their lifetimes.  
And w hile New Zealand is f urthest away from that conflict  in the Middle 
East, we also acknowledge the strongly held views  people have about it. 
New Zealanders were appalled by the barbarity of Hamas’ attack on Israel i 
citizens on October 7, 2023 , the worst massacre in Israel ’s history . Hamas 
have no place in any future Palestinian State. They know only hate.   
Today, nearly two years on from  the horror inflicted that day, including the 
continued holding of Israeli hostages by Hamas, we are shocked to our 
core by harrowing images of famine  in Gaza . We are also  revolted by what 
can only be described as  a gro ssly disproportionate response from the 
Israeli Government . 
However, t here is an old saying that sums up well the vexed question of 
Palestinian statehood recognition,  ‘If the string is too tight it will snap, but 
if it is too loose, the instrument will not play. ’ 
Those countries who hope d their earlier signalling of  Palestinian 
statehood recognition would protect  and promote the two -state solution  
have instead seen the Israeli Government snap, and con tinue its widely 
condemned military actions in Gaza while continuing to develop  illegal 
settlements on the West Bank , in defiance of international law . 
The New Zealand Government  agrees with the ends sought by partners, 
and acknowledges the ir good intentions . We commend  too the leadership 
efforts  of those countries trying to bring an end to the violence  through 
their diplomatic efforts .  
We desperately want diplomacy to succeed  and we believe it is those 
countries with leverage who are most likely to achieve a breakthrough . 
That would show  global leadership.   
However, we do  not believe  that th e current situation  represents  the last 
or even best chance to preserve the two-state  solution.  
Rather, we think a future situation  – when Israeli and Palestinian political 
leadership is an asset, not a liability, and where other situational variables 
have shifted the current calculus away from conflict and towards peace  – 
would be more conducive  for recognising Palestinian statehood .      
Therein lies our dilemma  over any decision to recognise Palestine 
statehood  now, because  statehood recognition, as an instrument for 
peace, also does not play because there is no fully legitimate and viable 
State of Palestine to recognise.    
Palestine does not fully meet the accepted criteria for a state as it does 
not fully control its own territory or population . There is also no obvious 
link be tween more of the international community recognising the State of 
Palestine and the claimed objective  of protecting the two -state solution.    
Indeed, what we have observed since partners’ pre-announcements 
reveals that recognising Palestine now will likely  prove counterproductive . 
That is, Hamas resisting negoti ation in the belief it is winning the global 
propaganda war , while pushing Israel towards even more intransigent 
military positions.   
Recognition  at this time , we also think, is open to political manipulation by 
both Hamas and Israel. Hamas will seek to portray our rec ognition  of 
Palestine as a victory, as they have already done in response to partner 
announcements . Israel will claim that recognition rewards Hamas and that 
it removes pressure on them  to release hostages and agree to a ceasefire.  
And then, like over 150  countries before  it, New Zealand recognition of 
Palestinian statehood now would serve as little more than an existential 
act of defiance against an unalterable state of affairs.   
We are not ready to make that gesture .  
Rather, t he New Zealand Government believes  that it has one opportunity 
to recognise Palestin ian statehood  and it would make better sense to do 
so when conditions offer greater prospects for peace and negotiation than 
at present.  
With a war raging, Hamas still in place, and no clarity on next steps, we 
do not think that time is now .  
We have , ever since the October 7 attacks , repeatedly demanded a 
ceasefire, the release of the remaining hostages, and for Israel to allow 
vital aid to flow into Gaza.  That is where our focus remain s.  
To that end, to day the New Zealand Government announc es a further 
significant financial contribution to support the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. 
Our focus will not shift  from where it is needed most, in Gaza, right now.   
Aid must flow  and the violence must cease.   
Ultimately, however, if leaders and their people do not covet peace, or 
cannot overcome their hate, no action s taken by us will shift them  from 
their destructive and ruinous path.  
But if they do  covet peace ; when we see action , not in the form of rhetoric,  
but of agreements ; and when statehood emerges,  with institutions to 
support it, New Zealand  will then recognise  Palestinian statehood .  
Colleagues , our focus on the leadership gaps that exist in our troubled 
world  goes directly to our responsibilit ies as member states – large and 
small – to bolster the United Nations to ensure , as our Charter’s preamble 
proclaims, ‘to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war’.  
Our support for the United Nations has remain ed unwavering  since its 
creation in San Francisco . Keeping the ‘spirit of San Francisco’ alive is the 
work of us all  because the United Nations, as was once said, remains ‘our 
greatest hope for future peace’ .  
And now is the time for t hose of us who believe in  multilateralism , not to 
compromise it, but  to stand up , and fight for it. 
Thank you   
ENDS   