1 Madam President, Mr. Secretary General, Distinguished Heads of State and Government, Honorable delegates, On behalf of the Panamanian people, with deep respect and renewed hopes I appear before this honorable Assembly on the 80th anniversary of this Organization, which continues to be a beacon for peace, cooperation and progress. 2 Panama has been committed, since the Charter of San Francisco in 1945, in favor of pacification, security, sustainable development and human rights. In these eight decades, our country has opted for multilateral diplomacy and public international law as a cardinal axis of its foreign policy. The UN80 Initiative, presented by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, offers the opportunity to reflect on the past, call attention to the threats of the present to envision a more just future. 3 We have the firm conviction that today, more than ever, we must strengthen the value of multilateralism to respond to global challenges and crises, as a tool to mitigate asymmetries between nations. In that sense, I want to highlight that multilateral policy helped our country to get out of the discriminatory lists where the European Union and the FATF had placed us. Well, it is incoherent to be part of the Security Council and at the same time share lists with countries that promote terrorism. 4 We consider a comprehensive reform timely to ensure that the Security Council is more effective; the General Assembly, more representative; specialized agencies, more inclusive; and, above all, reduce bureaucracy. Panama, like other countries, calls for greater representation of Latin America and the Caribbean in decision-making bodies. The time has come for the multilateral governance architecture to be updated. 5 Our region is the main food exporter on the planet, it has a strategic canal that connects the Atlantic with the Pacific and we hold more than 50% of the world's biodiversity. We are large suppliers of minerals, we have the largest aquifer reserves, we live together in peace and we fight for it. All these elements transform us into a major player worldwide and we must have representation according to our role and global importance. 6 In carrying out its task of containing and avoiding the tragic outcome of a global war, a fundamental mission of its reason for existing, the UN also faces the challenge of promoting urgent actions to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Today the world is facing three devastating crises: the climate crisis, pollution and the loss of biodiversity, in a scenario of fragmented cooperation. The response to these crises must be quick and supportive. 7 Given this, Panama presented the Nature Pledge, our Pact with Nature. It is a new way of understanding environmental and climate policy, in a framework that unites our climate, biodiversity and land obligations into a single national commitment. In practice, Panama is committed to reducing its emissions by 2035. Even though it is a carbon negative country, we believe that one more step can always be taken in favor of sustainability for future generations. 8 Therefore, we will restore one hundred thousand hectares of priority ecosystems, including mangroves and watersheds, because nature is our first line of defense against climate change. Panama trusts in a renewed UN, which strengthens digital security and international cooperation with ethical criteria and participation; that accompanies fair energy transitions and defends freedom of expression. 9 In this sense, we reiterate the inalienable respect for freedom and democracy in our region, which continues to suffer instability from those who do not respect the popular will of the polls or simply do not allow open and democratic elections. transparent. We want to be part of a UN capable of preventing conflicts before they occur; that can act promptly in humanitarian emergencies; to better coordinate its agencies at the field level; and that more faithfully represents the diversity of people in the world. 10 Panama has offered to host offices of Organizations of the United Nations System, in support of reform efforts within the framework of the UN80 Initiative. I also want to express my solidarity with the Japanese people, on the occasion of the 23rd anniversary of North Korea's admission of the kidnapping of at least 17 Japanese citizens. The world needs to know the truth so that these events are not repeated. Japan deserves justice. 11 Ladies and gentlemen, I cannot miss this opportunity to highlight that we have completed a quarter of a century since our canal passed into Panamanian hands. As of December 31, 1999, the Republic of Panama assumed the works and operation of the Canal, with efficiency, safety, sustainability and neutrality, in accordance with the Torrijos - Carter Panama Canal Treaty and the Permanent Neutrality Treaty, both of 1977. 12 Since then, we have managed the waterway in an exemplary manner, contributed to the economic development of the country and operated the Canal for the benefit of international navigation. In this period, Panama expanded the interoceanic route, with its own resources, to meet the demand for large ships. 13 Now we are going to go one step further, we are accompanying the Panama Canal Authority in the development of the Rio Indio reservoir, an ambitious project to guarantee water for the population and the Canal, so that ship traffic will not be threatened due to the droughts that strike from time to time. Our waterway serves more than 180 maritime routes and more than 140 nations, and approximately 4 percent of world trade transits through it. We are committed to guaranteeing efficiency in favor of international logistics. 14 Before this Assembly, Panama reaffirms once again its serious and sustained commitment to the regime established in the Treaty concerning permanent neutrality, and to whose protocol numerous States have adhered. Neutrality is the most appropriate formula to protect the security of our Canal, an asset of global utility. The neutral Panama Canal, open to the world and facilitator of more integrated international trade, is and will continue to be Panamanian. 15 Ladies and Gentlemen, Panama, as is known, maintains a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council in the period 2025 -2026. Last August, we held the rotating presidency of the Security Council, understanding it as a responsibility to maintain a strong voice in favor of peace, the sovereign equality of States, justice, international law and respect for pacts between countries. 16 Also, we have emphasized the importance of maritime security as a priority of action for our participation in the Council. Panama's national identity is closely linked to maritime transport. Over the centuries, we have managed to consolidate our role as a key player in international shipping and trade. Piracy, arms and narcotics trafficking, and illegal fishing impact trade and the global maritime transportation system. 17 As a transit nation and logistics center of the continent, Panama suggests strengthening cooperation between specialized agencies, including a regional network to promote maritime security, which operates under the umbrella of ocean governance, in accordance with international law. I want to reiterate in this Assembly the work that this Organization must do to mitigate the effects of illegal migration, promoted by organizations linked, directly or indirectly, to drug trafficking. 18 Millions of people passed through our Darién for years, and in a single year of management we reduced the flow of migrants to the north to zero. That crisis was resolved, thus fulfilling the promise of closing the illegal crossings through the Darién. The humanitarian and environmental consequences were extreme, the suffering of women and children victims of abuse and the contamination of one of the most biodiverse areas in the world still generate pain in those of us who have had direct contact with this situation. 19 Today, we have a north-south migration, on a much smaller scale but that renews the commitment to the orderly movement of people, so that they can return to their homes. I must say that the migratory drama was solved, but not the causes that caused the massive emigration of people. That our country has resolved this scourge does not mean that we should stop asking for concrete responses, as in the case of the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic, which faces uncontrolled migration that also impacts the entire region. 20 It is essential to find clear solutions, both for the Haitian crisis and for the effective control of the migratory flow. Currently, we also suffer from the growth of an illicit activity: drug trafficking. Today, it constitutes a threat to people's lives and a very high risk of instability throughout the region, through the different cartels that operate. 21 To give you a quick idea, this year alone Panama has seized nearly 150 tons of cocaine and other drugs, a historic and alarming fact. This forces us to redouble our efforts, have more cooperation and add resources in a fight that must be a common cause among all nations. Honorable members, Next year, the Amphictyonic Congress of Panama held by the Liberator Simón Bolívar, will celebrate its bicentennial. 22 Its proposal is an international system based on the sovereign equality of States, justice, law and international cooperation to achieve common goals for peoples. We hope that this commemoration will serve as a new starting point in international cooperation that respects and exalts the values ​​of sovereignty, peace and peaceful coexistence that should guide our work in this and other forums around the world. 23 Honorable members: Before this forum of world peace and international cooperation, I reiterate the faith of the Panamanian people in the United Nations System. In times of crisis, when the winds of unilateralism, polarization and fragmentation blow, Panama will make its voice heard in defense of multilateralism. Panama will continue to be an enthusiastic member of the United Nations, defender of international law and tireless promoter of world peace. 24 Because, as the motto that calls us together this year says, “United we are stronger,” and only when we are united can we build a more just and humane future for all. Thank you so much.