1 Intervention by the President of the Republic of Peru General Debate 80th Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations New York – United States of America Tuesday, September 23, 2025 Madam President of the General Assembly, Annalena Baerbock, Secretary General of the United Nations, António Guterres, Ladies and gentlemen heads of State present, Ladies and gentlemen, Peru is the center and cradle of great ancient civilizations, the last being the Empire of the Incas, which left a legacy of greatness. We are also heirs of the Viceroyalty of Peru that covered two thirds of South America. We are a mestizo country, a fundamental mix between Hispanics and Andeans. Proud to be heir to the two greatest empires of Europe and America of the 16th century, the Peruvian people today are resilient, entrepreneurial, supportive, lovers of peace, freedom and democracy. Our great writers, Mario Vagas Llosa and José María Arguedas shared the idea that Peru is a country of all bloods. Our identity creatively expresses that we are the unity of the diverse, united under the same red and white Peruvian flag. In our country the indigenous peoples and the peoples of the world live in Peace and Unity, as a great synthesis of Peru, a country in which Pope Leo XIV lived and worked for 40 years, nationalized Peruvian for his deep love for our people; both for its supportive and peaceful character, and for its Catholic and Christian faith. All studies indicate that we are the most entrepreneurial country in the world, which is why after the Covid-19 pandemic, which, due to a terrible government administration, caused more than two million deaths, we have begun to recover, achieving today more than 17 months of consecutive growth in our economy. We have defeated the recession and inflation caused by political violence and corruption, a failed coup d'état and the flight of more than 20 billion dollars between 2021 and 2023. We have regained the confidence of national and foreign investment and embraced freedom. We are a solvent and stable country. Due to the coup d'état of December 2022, which sought to establish a dictatorship by subjugating all powers of the State, I had to constitutionally assume the Presidency of the Republic. From that date, a narrative was established by which the coup plotter became a victim and the president who constitutionally and legally assumed the presidency was accused of being a coup plotter and usurper. The lie turned into truth and the truth into a lie. This is one of the issues of our time: the construction of false narratives that seek to create antidemocratic political projects. The reflection is that the ideologies of hate with their projects of failed States that grow as all-powerful States require, in order to impose themselves, a false narrative to achieve their objective through violence that, in power, crushes freedoms, crushes the press and the democratic opposition, violates human rights and begins the control, confiscation and expropriation of private companies, creating a corrupt bureaucracy that destroys the economy, society and public morality. The first step to all this is the construction of a story in which people lie, deceive and manipulate. The ideology of class hatred is very skilled at disrupting reality and constructing false stories because it uses the totalitarian method of repeating a lie ad infinitum, as was done in the world before the Second World War and as it is being done again because totalitarianism is renewed, it presents itself with other faces, which is why it continues to be a serious threat for countries and for the 3rd world. The cynical story is reinforced by interventionism in the internal affairs of countries, supporting and spreading falsehoods to destroy democracy and eliminate freedom. In Peru we have overcome a strong, organized and persistent political violence that sought the return to the government of the coup plotter and, since 2024, progress has been made in reestablishing stability and trust, which is why the Peruvian economy managed to grow that year, 3.3 percent, and, in the current year 2025, it is exceeding 3.5 percent growth, it is expected that in 2026, it will continue. the trend of economic expansion. The government guarantees three years of economic growth, leading the figures in South America. Inflation is less than 2 percent annually. International Reserves are greater than 88 billion dollars and our currency remains stable and strengthens. Our external debt is less than 32.2% of GDP, one of the lowest in America and the world, and our fiscal deficit, this year, will be 2.2 percent annually. POSITION BEFORE THE UN On October 24, the UN was created after the Second World War, when it was possible to defeat one of the largest totalitarian political projects - built under an ideology of hate - that produced the most serious genocide in the history of humanity, the Holocaust, which we must never forget. That disastrous war caused the death of 60 million human beings. Any ideology of hate, class hatred and its elevation to the principle and driving force of history; Racial hatred, nationalist hatred, religious hatred, ethnic hatred, hatred of women, among others, are the causes of the worst crimes in human history. Ideologies of hate construct stories as absolute truths that instrumentalize people and peoples. The Political Constitution of Peru affirms that the defense of the human person and their dignity is the supreme goal of society and the State. Peru rejects, consequently, the two main stories of hate in the world: class hatred and religious hatred, the origin of wars and inhuman violence. In Peru, we have suffered more than 20 years of messianic, dogmatic, violent and genocidal terrorism that cost the lives of more than 70 thousand Peruvians. The terrorist hates elections and the citizen's right to choose. When he participates, he does so to destroy democracy from within. However, the story that has been tried to be imposed is a blatant lie: the Armed and Police Forces that defended the life and freedom of Peruvians are accused of violating human rights; Thus, the heroes who defend life, democracy and freedom become victims, and the terrorists become victims. Thus, the heroes who defended democracy are persecuted in trials that last for decades while the terrorists are compensated and considered victims. The UN has been a fundamental milestone in the 20th century. But in the 21st century we must be more attentive. It is our duty to prevent the world from rushing towards new genocides and new violence. It is not acceptable in a civilized world for one country to invade another using a false story to justify a war that attacks, mainly, the population. The killing of civilians, the capture of hundreds of young people, women and even children to use them as hostages is not admissible. We live before the threat of international organized crime. In Peru, international crime dedicated to extortion resorts to terrorist methods such as bomb attacks to subdue citizens. These criminal organizations that use weapons of war have created financial mechanisms to launder blood money, sending large sums to their countries of origin. 5 The aim is to normalize this violence that requires, for its defeat, recognition by the UN as terrorist organizations and new national and international legislation that stops its threat to the democratic system and development. It is also imperative to act against drug trafficking and Illegal mining that destroys the environment, pollutes rivers, and condemns towns and people to slavery. International crime has subjected thousands of women, extracted from their countries with violence and deception, exploited and deprived of their freedom. Ladies and gentlemen, We are living in moments that remind us of the darkest episodes of our modern history and Peru is convinced that the world does not need less UN, but more and better UN. One that is in line with the times in which the ideologies of hate that caused and cause so much damage to humanity have taken refuge in lies, in false information and in the penetration of democratic societies. Peru, as a founding member, is committed to an open multilateral system, based on international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter. It sees the UN as the pillar of the model that has brought peace and prosperity to the world and that today must enter into a process of adaptation in the face of new threats. Each of our countries has a duty to contribute to the development of solutions to the common problems we face. And that is what my country strives for. But the interconnection of our societies and economies means that only through international cooperation can we resolve the crises we face. If we do not reform the United Nations, our common home, to restore representativeness and effectiveness to its action, we run the serious risk of seeing one of the most precious instruments that the international community has for the stability of the world disappear. 6 For this reason, Peru supports the work of the UN80 Initiative, initiated by the Secretary General, placing special emphasis on the need to refocus the organization on its fundamental functions, bringing it closer to the needs of the people, while making it more efficient. UN80 should be an opportunity to strengthen multilateralism and ensure that the organization is better prepared to meet its essential objectives. This reform can only bear full fruit if it is complemented by a transformation of UN governance, which avoids institutional blockages in decision-making, while ensuring its suitability. Madam President, In Peru, our government works to fulfill its commitments both to its population and to the international community, facing the threat of organized crime resulting from the decomposition of tyrannical governments. Since the first day of my government, we have fought to restore governance in the country and defeat polarization and violence. In Peru, the full separation of powers, the rule of law, and respect for freedom and human rights govern. My government is the most stable in a period of five years, in which five presidents have succeeded one another. We are fighting for citizen security, confronting crime, which takes advantage of the rise in the price of gold, and drug trafficking, with positive results that can be verified. We work to strengthen human capital. We are fighting against child malnutrition and anemia, and we are building schools and hospitals throughout the country, as has not been done in recent years. The priority is children, women and the Peruvian family. 7 We are modernizing the country's infrastructure: ports, airports, roads, bridges, designing an economy better connected to the world. As well as a firm policy to combat corruption. Our objective is to guarantee free and fair elections, defeating the attempt of a violent minority that seeks its failure. Ladies and gentlemen, The United Nations Organization has always been present in the modern history of my country, particularly in its most difficult moments. Simultaneously with what is happening in the world, and despite our efforts, Peru today: - Find its democratic institutions and the rule of law attacked by the polarization of politics, the cause and consequence of the return of extremist violence. - It suffers from the scourge of transnational terrorist organized crime that causes deaths, attacks and insecurity, and drug trafficking that destroys the social fabric. - Faces the threat of climate change that deteriorates its Amazon, causes the melting of its glaciers and puts its biodiversity at risk, and - Promotes inclusive and sustainable growth in a context of opposition between powers. But none of these problems are only national, but global. For this reason, we need the United Nations to once again be an agora of dialogue and cooperation. I wish to remember the legacy of Ambassador Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who managed to carry out relevant action for the Organization despite the Cold War. With that example and in view of our region's attachment to the purposes of the Charter and for the sake of better representation, 8 we believe that it is time for whoever occupies the next General Secretariat to come from Latin America. Ladies and gentlemen, Peru is committed to ensuring that this General Assembly is not a simple anniversary, but rather the reaffirmation of our commitment to collective action that revitalizes the United Nations as a tool that supports global Peace and Unity, as well as development. We have to be firm in the truth in the face of stories that hide it, pervert it or openly lie in order to hide agendas that do not correspond to our time and, much less, to the destiny of humanity. Therefore, it is imperative to strengthen the truth against stories based on hate, the repeated lies that seek to impose themselves and that only engender destruction. Despite all the obstacles, the truth breaks through and sets us free. Peace and Unity for Peru and the world. Thank you so much !