 
Statement by 
Head of the DPRK Delegation
 
H.E. Mr. Kim Son
 
Gyong
,
 
Vice Minister of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
 
 
A
t the 
General Debate
 
of
 
80
th
 
Session of
 
the United Nations 
General Assembly
 
 
 
 
29 September
 
202
5
,
 
New York
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1
 
 
 
Madam President,
 
Mr. Secretary General,
 
Distinguished Delegates,
 
First of all, I would like to express my expectation that the 80
th
 
session of the UN General 
Assembly, convened in the significant year of the 80
th
 
founding anniversary of the United Nations, 
will come to an excellent fruition amid extraordinary interest of the participants.
 
Taking note of the opening address of Mr. Gutterres, UN Secretary
–
General on September 23, I 
command his assertion that the rol
e of the UN, the one
-
of
-
a
-
kind podium should be enhanced since 
an individual state cannot address issues alone and that the UN should be reformed to fit for the 21th 
century.
 
  
As reflected in the theme of the current session “Better Together: 80 years and
 
more for peace, 
development and human rights”, we are now at a crucial watershed where we all look back on the 
80
-
year
-
long history of the UN and chart the future.
 
  
Eighty years ago from now, humankind adopted the UN Charter on the debris of the disastro
us 
war, thereby laying a cornerstone for the contemporary international relations and establishing the 
most inclusive international organization, the United Nations.
 
  
Since its foundation, the UN has made remarkable successes in various fields including p
eace and 
security and socio
-
economic development by accelerating decolonization worldwide and leading the 
codification of universal norms of international law.
 
  
Despite many twists and turns, it is fortunate that a new world war has not broken out. It can
 
be 
said to be a desired result of the main spirit of the UN Charter to save succeeding generations from 
the scourge of the world war, which twice has brought untold sorrow to mankind.
 
  
We cannot underestimate the role that the UN played in promoting coop
eration among nations in 
the socio
-
economic fields such as poverty eradication and fight against communicable diseases and 
in propelling sustainable development at a global level.
 
  
However, in the annals of the UN history, disgraceful pages are also recor
ded where the title of 
the UN, overwhelmed by high
-
handedness and arbitrariness of the hegemonic forces, was abused in 
 
 
2
 
 
 
exerting pressure to deprive sovereign states of their legitimate right to normal development, quite 
contrary to the spirit of the Charte
r.
 
  
We should not feel relieved nor congratulate ourselves on the non
-
occurrence of the World War 
III for the past 80 years. Instead, we should pay due attention to the fact that the inducible threat has 
persisted and is now becoming more serious, and tak
e measures accordingly.
 
  
Madam President,
 
  
The international community is now witnessing the most turbulent and violent world after World 
War II.
 
  
The modern history has recorded many incidents and events. But today, the international norms 
and order es
tablished and consolidated along with the foundation of the UN are disregarded and the 
sovereignty of states is openly violated as never before.
 
  
The indiscriminate tariff war vis
-
à
-
vis the entire world has plunged the world economy as a whole 
into the sw
amp of stagnation and instability.
 
  
Even the 2030 agenda for sustainable development, committed to eliminating inequality and 
poverty and ensuring human dignity worldwide, is denied for the reason that it does not meet the 
interest of an individual countr
y. This is the stark reality.
 
  
The UN has served as a multilateral forum where all countries of the world , big or small, get 
together and discuss common responses to global challenges on an equal footing, transcending 
differences in size, population and 
state power. That UN is now faced with unprecedented severe 
crises.
 
  
All these turbulences and pains suffered by the world are fundamentally 
caused by
 
high
-
handedness and arbitrariness and avarice of hegemonic powers in their attempt to subject the whole 
world to their interests and to place their exclusive interests above the common good of mankind.
 
  
Madam President,
 
  
Today, the complicated international situation highlights the need to reconsider the role of the UN 
responsible for maintaining internati
onal peace and security.
 
  
As the world’s most universal international organization comprising all sovereign states on the 
globe, the UN cannot be represented by a certain individual state or a small group of states.
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
  
In particular, in order to prevent ar
bitrariness and high
-
handedness of specific forces, it is 
imperative to expand and strengthen the representation of developing countries that take up an 
absolute majority of the UN membership and to correct the Western
-
led inappropriate structure in 
the Se
curity Council entrusted with an important mandate of maintaining international peace and 
security.
 
  
Only when the UN puts an end to the arbitrary, high
-
handed, biased and double
-
dealing practices 
in all its activities and strictly adheres to the principl
es of sovereign equality, non
-
interference in 
internal affairs, impartiality and objectivity, can it restore its image as an organization with full 
qualifications and capacity for realizing the purposes of the Charter.
 
  
Madam President,
 
  
Peace and securi
ty are the long
-
cherished desire of humanity and the first agenda of the UN.
 
  
Without peace and security, we can neither attain the SDGs nor think about a good future that 
ensures human dignity and prosperity.
 
  
However, the present objective security situation of the Korean peninsula is faced with serious 
challenges as never before.
 
  
The U.S.
-
ROK, U.S.
-
Japan military alliances and the U.S.
-
Japan
-
ROK trilateral military 
cooperation system directly targeting the
 
DPRK rapidly evolve into a more offensive and aggressive 
military bloc with nuclear elements contained. Meanwhile, war exercises and military build
-
up 
against our State are breaking all the previous records in terms of scale, nature, frequency and scope.
 
  
Nowhere in the world can we find such a place as the Korean peninsula where the world’s biggest 
nuclear weapon state and its allied forces conduct bilateral and multilateral war exercises all the year 
round and even stage real
-
war drills simulating the u
se of nukes targeting a sovereign state, by 
mobilizing massive multi
-
national combined forces and latest strategic assets.
 
  
Even a few days before the current session begins, the U.S. and its allied forces waged nuclear 
war drills such as "Iron Mace" and 
"Freedom Edge", aimed at mastering the procedure and methods 
of nuclear attacks against the DPRK under the fait accompli scenario, thus extremely straining the 
situation on the Korean peninsula.
 
 
 
4
 
 
 
  
Yet, even in the face of the tremendous military threat dir
ected against the DPRK and the 
dangerous security landscape, roaring guns of war are silenced and peace and security are firmly 
safeguarded on the Korean peninsula.
 
  
This is undeniable reality.
 
  
Thanks to our State's enhanced physical war deterrent in di
rect proportion to the growing threat of 
aggression of the U.S. and its allies, the will of the enemy states to provoke a war is thoroughly 
contained and the balance of power on the Korean peninsula is ensured.  
 
  
In order to permanently maintain this sta
te of balance and ensure everlasting peace on the Korean 
peninsula, we have stipulated nuclear in our Constitution as a sacred and absolute thing that can 
never be touched upon 
and
 
tampered with.
 
  
Imposition of “Denuclearization” on the DPRK is tantamount
 
to demanding it to surrender 
sovereignty and right to existence and violate the Constitution.
 
  
We will never give up sovereignty, abandon the right to existence and violate the Constitution.
 
  
Comrade 
Kim Jong U
n
, President of the State Affairs of the 
DPRK, made it clear at the 13th 
session of the 14th Supreme People’s Assembly on September 21 that our Party and the government 
would invariably and firmly safeguard without slightest vacillation the Constitution of the DPRK 
and its basic law on the policy
 
of nuclear forces perpetuating the possession of nuclear weapons and 
thoroughly guarantee the supreme interests of our State.
 
  
The policy line of Comrade President of the State Affairs represents our state law and we will 
defend the state law without fai
l.
 
  
We will never give up nuclear which is our state law, national policy and sovereign power as well 
as the right to existence. Under any circumstances, we will never walk away from this position.
 
  
Madam President,
 
  
The DPRK is vigorously opening up th
e road to overall national prosperity on the basis of peace 
and security guaranteed by its powerful strength.
 
  
Vigorous efforts are underway to further consolidate the driving force and potentials for 
development of the self
-
reliant national economy in th
e overall national economy including industry 
and agriculture and to meet the output targets. As a result, the completion of the 5
-
year plan of 
 
 
5
 
 
 
national economic development set forth by the 8th Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea is 
definitely within 
reach.
 
  
Notably, construction of 50,000 residential houses in Pyongyang is carried out without fail on an 
annual basis well ahead of schedule.
 
  
Meanwhile, creatures for welfare of the people including rural dwelling houses, large
-
scale 
greenhouses and mo
dern hospitals are being built grandiosely.
 
  
With a view to providing all people with affluent and civilized new life and rapidly raising the 
level of development of all regions within a short period of 10 years, the newly adopted policy of 
rural developm
ent is dynamically executed with tangible results one after another.
 
  
The DPRK is confidently following the road of its own choice without any fluctuation or 
vacillation even under the political turmoil worldwide.
 
  
This reality is a brilliant fruition of
 
the unshakable spirit of independence and correct leadership of 
the Workers’ Party of Korea and the government of the DPRK.
 
  
Madam President,
 
  
This year marking the 80th anniversary of the end of World War II, colorful political and cultural 
events have
 
taken place in various countries commemorating the victory in the anti
-
fascist world war.
 
  
It is an expression of the rock
-
firm will of the righteous international community not to tolerate 
the attempts to deny the result of the anti
-
fascist world war an
d national liberation struggles achieved 
at a tremendous sacrifice
 
 
80 years have passed since the end of World War II. Yet genocide and crimes against humanity that 
can even overshadow Hitler are now openly committed in the Middle East, much to the 
conste
rnation of the world.
 
  
Israel, which massacred over 60,000 Palestine civilians in the past 2 years, is seeking to occupy 
the whole area of Gaza by force and completely exterminate the Palestine population. 
 
  
We strongly urge Israel to stop immediately cr
imes against humanity and withdraw from the Gaza 
Strip. Likewise, we fully support the establishment of an independent state of Palestine with East 
Jerusalem as its capital and Palestine's full
-
fledged membership of the UN.
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
  
Madam President, 
 
  
Independence, peace and friendship are the invariable external policy ideals of the DPRK. 
 
  
The DPRK will, as in the past, so in the future, collaborate with all countries and nations that 
oppose and reject aggression, intervention, domination and subju
gation and aspire after 
independence and justice, irrespective of differences in ideas and systems. 
 
  
The DPRK will promote multifaceted exchanges and cooperation with the countries that respect 
and take friendly approaches towards it. 
 
  
Thank you.
 