 
                                                      1/7 
The President of the Republic  
 
ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PORTUGUESE 
REPUBLIC  
80TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
New York , UN, September 23, 2025  
 
check against delivery  
 
Madam President of the General Assembly,  
Mr. Secretary -General,  
Your Excellencies,  
This is a symbolic moment for the United Nations - the celebration of its 
80th anniversary - and for Portugal, which celebrates its 70th year of 
membership. A time for reflection, but also for commitment and renewed 
multilateral ambition.  
Portugal is today what it always aspired to be. A country open to the 
world, to listening and dialoguing, committed to building bridges, deeply 
multilateralist and guided by the United Nations Charter. A world with more 
international cooperation and respect for international law is safer, more 
predictable, more stable and peaceful, more prosperous, more plural, more 
representative and better able to respond collectively to global challenges.  
70 years ago, we found in this community a space to uphold our  true 
values and contribute to global solutions, even in today's increasingly 
fragmented, polarized and unpredictable world. And it is in this same 
community that we will continue to defend the basic principles of healthy 
coexistence between nations.  
 
                                                      2/7 
The President of the Republic  
It is also with this cohesion and sense of responsibility, with this 
awareness of the need to contribute, act and decide guided by values and 
principles, that we are candidates for the Security Council for 2027 -2028, a 
decision formalized in 2013.  
Your Excellencies,  
I would like to commend the outgoing President, Mr. Philémon Yang, for 
his leadership in implementing the Pact for the Future. And I would like to 
congratulate the President of the 80th Session of the General Assembly, 
Annalena Baerbock, and wish her the greatest success.  
I express my appreciation for the tireless work of Secretary -General 
António Guterres. His humanism, devotion to international law and the 
reforms he has championed since 2017, now including UN80 and the Pact for 
the Future, are testaments to his work and will be his legacy. It's a source of 
pride to have a Portuguese citizen as UNSG and even more so to have 
someone who embodies the Portuguese ethos in international relations. You 
will always have Portugal's unwavering support.  
Your Excellencies,  
We live in a time of multiple and persistent crises, marked by division, 
polarization and violations of international law. It's a time of division 
between the exercise of power and responsibility, between technology and 
ethics, between the urgency of crise s and the capacity for response and 
action. Inevitably affected, the UN is facing an existential juncture as it enters 
its eighth decade. Without transformation, reinforcement and renewal, the 
UN will be marginalized,  and we will be at the mercy of the rul e of force. No 
G1, G2, G3, G1+2 or G2+1 will provide a solution. We support UN80 and the 
Pact for the Future, as well as reforms that strengthen the Organization 
without marginalizing the pillars of development and human rights.  
International law cannot be ignored. We believe in the rule of law as the 
foundation of international peace and justice. A world governed by rules is a 
safer and more predictable and equitable world. The Charter of the United 
Nations must remain our common compass . 
 
                                                      3/7 
The President of the Republic  
The United Nations will have to adapt to our times, but we must not 
forget the lesson of the League of Nations. History has already shown us what 
happens when principles are abandoned in the name of pure realpolitik . 
Your Excellencies,  
We believe that, in the process of reforming and transforming the UN, it 
is crucial to act in three main areas. Prevention , partnership  and protection . 
Prevention : to act before conflict and not only afterwards. Through  
mediation, preventive diplomacy , the good offices  of the Secretary General, 
and the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).  
Conflict prevention saves lives, averts destruction and institutional 
collapse. Peacebuilding tackles the root causes of violence and promotes 
resilient and peaceful societies.  
Prevention is also about development. Together with an African partner 
- Burundi - Portugal co -chaired the preparation of the 4th Conference on 
Financing for Development. We did it with ideas, with dialog ue, with 
determination and with results. Because without sustainable development 
there will be no lasting peace. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda and 
promoting a balanced reform of the international financial architecture 
should be a priority for the next five years.  
At the same time we are ensur ing that digital, space and AI technologies 
are a force for peace, not tools of domination. Bridging the digital and 
technological divides is central to building resilient societies . 
Aware of the risks posed by climate change to international peace and 
security, we are also proud to be one of the strongest voices in defence  of 
the oceans initiatives. After UNOC2 in Lisbon and with UNOC3 in Nice, we 
renewed our commitment to protecting the oceans, being one of the first 
European states to ratify the BBNJ Agreement, having already protected 27% 
of our maritime area, just 3% sh ort of the 30% target for 2030. Rising sea 
levels and plastic pollution are grave  threats for several member state s and 
priorities for Portugal.  
Your Excellencies,  
 
                                                      4/7 
The President of the Republic  
For Partnership , we believe that the United Nations will only be able to 
respond effectively to the challenges of our time if it deepens strategic 
partnerships, particularly with regional organizations, which are essential for 
promoting sustainable and inclusive solution s. 
On a concrete level, Portugal contributes to building partnerships and 
consensus. Listening, engaging in dialogue and  being  present on all 
continents with equal humility and ambition. As evidenced by The 
Community of Portuguese -Speaking Countries: nine countries, four 
continents, one language and shared values on a platform with its own voice 
at the UN.  
We are also committed to dialogue between civilizations, as we 
demonstrated by hosting the 10th Global Forum of the Alliance of 
Civilizations in Lisbon, and to combating racism, having hosted the 1st UN 
Conference on Racism, following the commitments  we have also promoted  
for the global implementation of the Durban Declaration.  
We are part of the Ibero -American community. Portugal feels like a 
brother to Latin America, sharing common priorities such as inclusive 
multilateralism, sustainable development and social cohesion.  
Our partnership with the Global South is built on respect and solidarity.  
We launched the EU -African Union summits. We have active cooperation 
with the LDCs  (Least Developed Countries) , SIDS  (Small Island Developing 
States)  and LLDCs  (Landlocked Developing Countries) . 
Partnerships also focusing on w omen , youth, agents of change, access to 
education, leadership, political participation and the protection of rights. The 
world needs more women leaders and young people in decision -making 
processes.  
Madam President,  
The third pillar on which we must focus our action to transform the 
system is Protection  - the protection of people and rights.  
There have been  over 65 years  of peacekeeping . More than 20,000 
soldiers and security forces took part in more than 25 missions on 4 
 
                                                      5/7 
The President of the Republic  
continents. This engagement i s particularly significant  in Africa, where  a large 
part of the  future stability is at stake.  
A commitment to peacekeeping at a time when such support is decisive . 
Four peace keeping  operations, including a rapid reaction force, we pay on 
time, we are on the honour  roll and we defend predictable and stable 
funding, including for missions authorized by the Security Council and led by 
the African Union.  
The protection of civilians is central. This year marks the 25th anniversary 
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
involvement of children in armed conflict . Children continue to be victims in 
almost every scenario. We have a legal, political and moral duty to protect 
them.  
We advocate strengthening international humanitarian law, which must 
be respected by all, without exceptions or conditions. The Geneva 
Conventions are not suggestions, they are obligations. As president of the 
6th Commission at the 79th General Assembly, P ortugal contributed to laying 
the foundations for a Convention on Crimes against Humanity - an essential 
step, negotiated by consensus, so that the law is not held hostage by politics.  
We maintain a deep commitment to human rights. Civil, political,  
including freedom of expression,  economic, social and cultural rights - all of 
them - are universal, interdependent and indivisible.  
Your Excellencies,  
We cannot remain indifferent to today's most pressing conflicts and 
crises, which we must address in the light of the United Nations Charter and 
international law, including humanitarian law. We defend the same 
principles - sovereignty, territorial integri ty, self -determination - in all 
geographies, from Europe to Africa and the Middle East.  
In the Middle East  – a fundamental issue at this General Assembly – the 
challenge is to create political, economic and social conditions that will 
strengthen the two State solution. Rebuilding economies and societies by 
offering an opportunity for peace in the daily lives o f Israelis and Palestinians 
– to live rather than perish.  
 
                                                      6/7 
The President of the Republic  
In Ukraine  sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity  must be 
upheld .  A total, immediate and unconditional ceasefire in Ukraine is  the first 
step towards a just, comprehensive and sustainable peace . To save lives and 
to stabilize both Europe and the world.   
In Sudan, to put an end to  the biggest humanitarian catastrophe in Africa.  
In Haiti , where the suffering of the population is no longer tenable, given 
the fear of the barbaric atrocities of criminal gangs and the recruitment of 
child soldiers. A decisive UN assistance to  the Multinational Security Support 
Mission, before it is too late .  
 
Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
At a time when we are witnessing the largest number of armed conflicts 
since the creation of the United Nations, Portugal is ready to take on greater 
responsibilities and represent a global voice in the Security Council, bringing 
the experience of almost n ine centuries of history as a country, the lessons 
learned in recent decades and the proximity to all the states represented 
here. Our vision for the Security Council is therefore based on the three 
pillars I mentioned as essential for the UN - Prevention , Partnership  and 
Protection . 
And with the  reform of the Security Council , to make it more 
representative and effective. A Council that reflects the geopolitical reality 
of the 21st century - and doesn't remain stuck in 1945. A Council with a 
permanent African presence, with SIDS represented and with the recognition 
of major eme rging powers such as Brazil and India. A Council that is more 
transparent, plural and consistent with the letter and spirit of the Charter.  
A Security Council which, in  2024, met frequently, adopted few resolution s 
and registered the highest number of vetoes since  1989. It is unacceptable 
that the use of the veto continues to paralyze essential decisions in the face 
of human suffering. Article 27, paragraph 3 of the Charter is clear: a party to 
a conflict shall not be the judge of its own case.  Portugal supports the ACT 
 
                                                      7/7 
The President of the Republic  
group's Code of Conduct, measures to restrict the use of veto and all 
initiatives that strengthen transparency and accountability within the 
Council.  
 
 
Your Excellencies,  
Portugal is presenting itself to the Security Council without hidden 
agendas, but rather with an agenda aligned with the values and objectives of 
the UN. With humility, but with confidence, we propose to contribute to a 
Council that is more effective, repr esentative and close to those who expect 
protection from it.  
Portugal is a predictable country, a bridge -builder, a reliable partner and, 
above all, an uncompromising defender of the UN Charter. It is in this spirit 
that we want to serve, that we reaffirm our commitment to the United 
Nations today and that we hope w ill earn your trust.  
Thank you.   
 