1 Madam President of the General Assembly, Distinguished Heads of State and Government, Dear Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Ladies and Gentlemen: I. The profound crisis we face This is my third intervention at the United Nations General Assembly. It is, without a doubt, an enormous privilege and honor to represent Paraguay in this great forum, a country that may seem small geographically, but is a giant in its spirit and potential. Therefore, when flying to New York from afar I thought I would start this speech by expressing the joy I feel for having the opportunity to tell you about the great things that await Paraguay. 2 However, events in recent days make this simply impossible. Instead, I must painfully begin by recalling the anecdote of the great German historian Theodor Mommsen, who, upon receiving the Nobel Prize in 1903, asked his audience not to applaud after his acceptance speech: "The times," he said sadly, "are too serious for that." The following years would fully confirm his intuition. I think exactly the same can be said now. Indeed, these days we have seen that evil, radical ideologization, intolerance, are unfortunately real, and are rooted in certain sectors of our societies. 3 I am still shocked, and also sad and distressed, by the shocking images of two cowardly and incomprehensible political attacks. First, intolerance and hatred took the life of a great human being, Miguel Uribe, the Colombian presidential candidate, who was murdered in public during a tour of a plaza. The ghosts of violence, which we thought were a thing of the past for our brothers in Colombia. Second, we saw that a young dreamer, Charlie Kirk, was miserably taken from his wife and two children for a single sin: defending his convictions and values ​​with great eloquence and courage. Both, instead of resorting to violence to impose their ideas, resorted to the most civil and peaceful method possible: free, open, frank debate – without avoiding controversial positions – but always within the framework of respect. 4 The ominous, macabre response must awaken us from our sleepy state of complacency. Dear friends, Our values, our very way of life, are in danger. The idea of ​​democracy, a venerable and brilliant creation of the Greek genius that allows us a peaceful modus vivendi despite our differences, is at risk. Therefore, in times when darkness seeks to extinguish the light, we must take positions. This is no time for timid people: either we are on the right side, of peace and reason, or we are with violence and intolerance. 5 Our children and grandchildren will not forget the attitude we have taken in the face of the enormous challenge we face. That is why I want to be very clear with you: political violence is immoral, intolerable and deeply harmful. We must reject it without nuances. Therefore, let us say loud and strong: no to hatred, no to violence, no to authoritarianism! We must not underestimate the seriousness of what is happening. These are not isolated cases: they are patterns. And the situation has been worsening under the impassive gaze of governments and political movements. Polarization and extremism, previously revealed subtly in texts and speeches, are today materializing in real acts of violence. There is a crisis of belief in the institutions: citizens no longer trust. 6 Our democracy, that democracy that for decades has been a guarantee of the most fundamental rights of human beings, personified in that magnificent instrument that is the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” – an enduring achievement of the United Nations system – is besieged by all quarters and spectrums, both from the left and the right. And this, gentlemen, can be a way no return. II. Venezuela and Nicaragua This crisis situation is the perfect breeding ground for authoritarianism. Where democratic values ​​erode, authoritarianism – or its perverse twin brother, populism – take their place. 7 Paraguay views with enormous concern the restrictions on the exercise of fundamental rights, such as access to free information and freedom of expression in some sister countries, which are already palpable demonstrations that the crisis is real and deep. Thus, unfortunately, the situation in Venezuela has become truly alarming. Added to the systematic violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms are actions contrary to international law and the persecution of political leaders. The electoral process of July 2024 trampled on the will of the Venezuelan people. Seven million Venezuelans have left their homeland – the largest migration crisis in the history of the Western Hemisphere. 8 In Nicaragua, on the other hand, the persecution of political opponents persists and expands aggressively. The situation of human rights and fundamental guarantees is too serious. They have expelled entire religious orders. They have stripped the nationality of hundreds of Nicaraguans whose only crime was dissent. Even the Catholic Church is persecuted – something unthinkable in Latin America. Paraguay knows, better than anyone, the calamity of authoritarianism and dictatorship, since we lived through the longest military regime on the continent of the twentieth century, whose scars have not yet fully healed. That is why we cannot, nor should we, remain silent while our Latin American brothers suffer the same oppression that has marked our past. 9 The crisis of democracy, friends, cannot be resolved with a heavy hand, nor censorship, nor authoritarianism, much less violence. We must resist these alluring impostors. The crises of democracy, as the Italian philosopher Norberto Bobbio said, are resolved in only one way: with more democracy. Not with authoritarian puppets, nor with hatred or intolerance. We must respond with more democracy, more republic, more tolerance, more dialogue, more rights, more freedom. III. Armed conflicts, collapse of supply chains, China 10 The reason for being, the essence of the United Nations is and will be the maintenance of peace. However, as we gather here, more than 120 armed conflicts show us how serious the failure of our institutions can be. Paraguay extends its solidarity with all victims of armed conflicts and advocates, once again, the peaceful resolution of disputes. Today I particularly highlight the painful situation in Haiti. The time for decisive and coordinated action by the United Nations and, especially, the Security Council, is now; Paraguay knows this and is ready to help the Haitian people, who can no longer wait. On the other hand, I want to highlight a situation that goes beyond armed conflicts, but is equally serious. We face a silent 11 but devastating crisis: the collapse of global supply chains. The pandemic showed us how fragile they were. The war in Ukraine strained them even more. And now, geopolitical fragmentation threatens to break them definitively. The world urgently needs more reliable, more diversified, more resilient supply chains. We cannot continue to rely on systems that place efficiency over safety, cost over reliability. I want to be clear: not all trade associations are created equal. We must be wary of misleading economic models that come with political authoritarianism, mass surveillance, and the erosion of fundamental freedoms. 12 When we accept investments that compromise our sovereignty, when we allow our critical infrastructure to depend on authoritarian regimes, we are mortgaging not only our economy, but our democracy. Therefore, we advocate for a deeper integration between our countries, based not only on trade, but on shared values: the rule of law, individual freedoms, a free market economy, the defense of the traditional family and the right to life from the conception of the human being. For this reason, Paraguay's foreign policy is not based on pure interests, but on those shared values ​​and principles. IV. Israel 13 For these reasons, Paraguay cannot and should not avoid the realities that challenge world peace. Diplomatic prudence cannot become silent complicity. It is precisely at these moments when the principles that define us as a democratic nation must be translated into clear and unequivocal positions with its friends and allies. Paraguay here reaffirms its position unambiguously: Israel has the legitimate right to defend itself. The terrorist attacks of October 7, 2023 against Israeli civilians were grotesque acts of barbarism that no cause can justify. We reject any attempt to biasedly equate responsibility between Israel's democratically elected authorities and the leaders of the Hamas terrorist group. 14 Anti-Semitism, gentlemen, as daily events demonstrate, is not an accident of the twentieth century: it is alive and strong. It is part of that cycle of irrational violence and hatred that I spoke of at the beginning of my words. I must confess here that I have never understood how so many people have adopted this horrible worldview, given that the Jewish people have given so much materially, culturally and spiritually to the world. And yet, unfortunately, this perversion is still among us. The only answer is to be alert: no hate! Shoah, never again! That is why Paraguay has been one of the first countries in the world to designate both Hezbollah and Hamas as international terrorist organizations and has always deeply condemned their evil actions. I strongly condemn these criminal organizations once again today before all of you. 15 My country will continue to oppose those who deny the sacred value of human life, a fundamental idea in the Paraguayan vision of the human being. We also urgently call for the implementation of a solution that alleviates the humanitarian situation in Palestinian territory, puts an end to violence and guarantees the immediate release of the hostages, promoting a constructive dialogue that leads towards peaceful coexistence between both peoples and is a source of lasting peace in the Middle East region. V. Taiwan Paraguay's principled diplomacy, based on conviction and not mere convenience, also explains the moral firmness we have regarding another democracy that faces existential threats. Coherence in the defense of democratic values ​​does not admit selective geographies or calculations of convenience. The 16 principles, when genuine, are upheld for their intrinsic value, not for their political profitability. Paraguay proudly maintains 67 years of diplomatic relations with the Republic of China - Taiwan. This friendship, forged on shared democratic values, has shown that cooperation between nations can be based on more than mere interest. Surely this decision costs us a lot financially, but believe me: the value of doing the right thing is priceless. The rising tensions in the Taiwan Strait concern us deeply. The increasingly aggressive military exercises, the constant air raids, the warlike rhetoric: everything points towards a dangerous escalation that could destabilize not only Asia, but the entire global order. Ladies and gentlemen: 17 It must be said without being lukewarm or faint-hearted: Taiwan deserves a place in this forum. It is a matter of strict justice. Their exclusion from the system of The United Nations is an affront that weakens the legitimacy of our institutions. Twenty-three million decent, hard-working and dignified people cannot continue to be invisible to multilateralism. Gentlemen, as in other cases, the question of Taiwan and its international status must also, inescapably, be part of the debates of this General Assembly. It is time to nip this decades-old tree of injustice in the bud and give China Taiwan a place in the United Nations. VI. Paraguay and its role as a middle power 18 These principled positions, based on convictions and not conveniences, give Paraguay something that is relatively scarce these days: genuine moral authority to discuss the problems that afflict us. In this context of global crisis, Paraguay reaffirms itself as a middle power, with a central role in building consensus and strengthening the multilateral system. The facts support our words: Paraguay proceeds with a characteristic constructive spirit in the debates of the multilateral system. In line with this active role, my country is currently a member of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and we have national experts in the Sea Court, the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Narcotics Control Board and the Advisory Commission on Administrative and Budgetary Matters, among others. In the period 2026 – 2027, 19 of us aspire to the Presidency of the Bureau of the 6th Commission of the General Assembly and we will assume the responsibility of being members of the Peacebuilding Commission. Dear friends, Paraguay is standing and ready to take its place in the concert of nations, not as a mere peripheral voice, but as a true leading actor in the search for solutions to global problems. For this reason, Paraguay accepts and commits to the objectives proposed in the UN80 initiative of the Secretary General, which include the search for greater efficiency in the use of existing resources, the simplification of processes and the review of the implementation of mandates. For this reason, Paraguay demands the implementation of geographical balance in the appointment of the next Secretary General, to strengthen the legitimacy and representativeness of this Organization. In this process, we are convinced, we must look to our region, which has candidates that meet the highest standards of experience, integrity, vision and, above all, leadership to generate bridges that help us overcome challenges with global impact and systemic risk. For this reason, Paraguay demands a profound reform of the Security Council, to prevent it from becoming dispensable within a multilateralism that needs to provide solutions to the numerous current conflicts, 21 both those between states and those caused by non-state actors. For this reason, we here ask for more flexible positions so that the Security Council can once again be truly representative in its membership and regain effectiveness in the fulfillment of its mission. For this reason, we demand the elimination of the veto, which will give more legitimacy to the organization and will allow the UN, as a universal organization, to once again be a protagonist in determining solutions to the great challenges facing our world. VIII. It is possible to look at the future with optimism Madam President, distinguished delegates: I know that the panorama that I have presented up to this point is not the best, it is even gloomy. But I have preferred to speak 22 with the truth, bluntly, so as not to underestimate the seriousness of our current situation. And yet, as an optimist of soul as I am, I can't help but say it: I look to the future with hope. As the great writer William Faulkner said, I believe that “humanity will not only endure, but will prevail.” With all our flaws, when we work together, When we put solidarity over separatism, dialogue over violence, tolerance over hatred, humanity is capable of great things. Building the future is not possible just by formulating a wish. Building the future requires intention, persistence, perseverance and discipline. I always say and I repeat it today: there are no shortcuts to development—there is only hard work. 23 But words are no longer enough. Our people are tired of empty promises, of grandiose declarations that do not translate into bread on the table, security on the streets, or education for their children. As in any relationship whose trust has been broken, the key to regaining it is to show results. Democracy must demonstrate that it can deliver. That can generate prosperity. That can ensure justice. That can offer hope. That it can be a democracy with a human face, with social content, like the one defended by the great ideologues of my political group, such as Ignacio A. Pane, Juan León Mallorquín, Fulgencio R. Moreno or Juan León Mallorquín. My Party has been demonstrating all this as the government of Paraguay in the last 24 decades: that it is possible to grow economically with justice, with democracy and with human rights. IX. Paraguay: macroeconomic numbers, reforms, social programs I do not say this with arrogance, but with the humility that characterizes us Paraguayans. Humility that is born from a history of greatness, but also of suffering. We Paraguayans know the eternal cycle of rebirth: the emergence, the crisis, the tragedy. We have had to reinvent ourselves and rise from the ashes. And in that noble process we built the Paraguay that today, finally, is being recognized for what it is: a giant that is resurgent. While the world falters, we are building something different. A model that works. A model that generates trust because it generates results. 25 The numbers speak for themselves: - We had economic growth of 5.9% in the first quarter of 2025, while the region averages just 2%. - Our inflation is controlled at 4.2%, below the regional average. - We are moving firmly towards post-pandemic fiscal convergence. Our fiscal deficit returns to 1.5% in the national budget for next year. - Our unemployment falls to historic lows: 5.6% in the first quarter of this year. But growth without social justice is empty. That's why we implement ambitious programs that are transforming lives: 26 Our "Zero Hunger in Schools" program feeds more than one million children in 7,000 schools daily. "Che Roga Porã" is turning thousands of working families into homeowners. For the first time, the State offers mortgage loans with installments equivalent to rent. We transform a monthly expense into family assets. I highlight that 118,000 people escaped poverty in a single year. Extreme poverty fell to 4.1%, the lowest level in our modern history. But none of this would be possible without strong institutions. That is why we undertook bold reforms: - We promoted the Civil Service Law to professionalize the public service, ending decades of clientelism. 27 - With the Integrity and Transparency Law we create real control and accountability mechanisms, strengthening the Comptroller General of the Republic. - We approved the Law of the Unified National Registry, a law that proposes a structural transformation and orders, after more than one hundred years, real estate property in Paraguay. The result: in July 2024, Paraguay reached investment grade for the first time in its history. Distinguished delegates, the Paraguayan model is not perfect. Of course. We have enormous challenges and much remains to be done. But we are changing reality. We are showing that, today, Paraguay is not just “a country.” In the words of the President of the F 28th International Automobile Federation, Mohammed ben Sulayem, Paraguay is “the country.” XI. Closing Madam President, distinguished delegates, I began this speech with some rather dark warnings about the state of global democracy and our societies. Times are serious and there is much to worry about. But I don't want to end on a pessimistic note: a different, better, brighter future is possible. It depends on us. Of all. To diagnose problems with courage, and face them with perseverance and conviction. 29 The future is not predetermined. Paraguay is living proof that, even despite the chaos and desolation of war, it is possible to rebuild. It is possible to reconcile prosperity with justice, growth with sustainability, openness with sovereignty. Paraguay is ready, dear friends, to be part of the solution. The sleeping giant of South America has awakened and reemerges with force. We are ready to be a central protagonist in the fight for the great values ​​of humanity, to be a leading actor in the concert of nations. Because we believe in a future where democracy not only survives, but flourishes; because we believe in a future in which development reaches everyone, not just a few; because we believe in a future where cooperation is based on shared values, not conveniences; 30 because we believe in a future where trust is earned with results, not with rhetoric; because we believe, indeed, that humanity will not only endure, but will prevail. *** That different future is possible. We Paraguayans are building it every day. I invite you to build it with us, all together, to leave a better world for our children and grandchildren – a world with more democracy, with more freedom, with more tolerance, with more justice. A world in which hope defeats pessimism, light prevails over darkness, and good triumphs victoriously – forever and ever – over evil. 31 Thank you very much.