 
Check against delivery!  
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT  
OF  
H.E. MRS. OANA -SILVIA ȚOIU,  
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF ROMANIA  
AND  
HEAD OF THE ROMANIAN DELEGATION  
TO THE 80TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL 
ASSEMBLY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 September  2025, New York  
 
 
 
 
Madam  President of the General Assembly,  
Excellencies,  
 
 
Our very presence here today, representing our countries together in the 
same room, part of the same conversation, is in itself a deep expression 
of our commitment to multilateralism .  
What is also in view are o ur hopes and our trust in the framework 
provided by the United Nations.  
 
Romania stands firmly by the United Nations, as we mark 80 years since 
its creation and 70 years since we joined . 
 
And, yes, we do celebrate and we are proud  of both our membership 
and the history, the mission and the work of th is organization,  but we 
also have a duty to see what works, what does not, and to act accordingly.  
 
”We are living in troubled times, without precedent in history. People 
say that we want to prevent war but war is very near to us. People say 
that we want to live under the reign of international law but the world 
assists impassibly to its repeated violati on”. 
 
I have heard in many interventions here, in the plenary of the United 
Nations, that we live unprecedent times . However, t he phrase I quoted,  
earlier does not belong to me and is not about 2025 .  
 
It was said by another Romanian Foreign Minister , almost a century ago , 
Nicolae Titulescu, twice  president of the General Assembly of the 
League of Nations .  
 
He was himself an advocate of collective security speaking to the world 
in an attempt to prevent the escalation towards  war and ensure that 
multilateralism has the power to fulfill a vision for peace.   
 
We do know the history of The League of Nations , but the history of UN 
will not be the same .  
 
Today the world does not assist impassibly .   
 
The world is here, present, involved, committed to peace efforts . 
 
We are here to ensure that  aggressors can no longer replace the rule of 
law with the rule of the mighty.  
 
Romania remains a staunch supporter of International Law: we lead  in 
promoting the universal jurisdiction of the International Court of 
Justice .  
 
This is particularly so after the International Court of Justice rendered its 
advisory opinion on the obligations of States in respect of climate change  
this July .  
 
We call on the states to join the Declaration of promoting the universal 
jurisdiction of the ICJ launched by Romania .  
 
Looking at the international peace and security , our aspirations remain 
the same as they were 80 years ago.  
 
For almost four  years, we have been witnessing a fully -fledged war of 
aggression  against Ukraine  started by Russia , unleashing the greatest 
security crisis in Europe in recent history and challengin g the rules -based 
international order.   
 
The latest violations of the sovereign airspace of Poland, Estonia, 
Denmark and my own country, Romania  - by reckless actions aimed to 
provo ke - were condemned by many other countries , here in New York, 
at the UN Security Council .  
 
We once again proved together that provocations meant to destabilize 
our alliances  and to  put pressure on our unity achieve the opposite.  
 
We know and reaffirm that we are stronger together, that the prosperity 
of any of us depends on the security of all of us.   
 
The war in Ukraine  which is carried out  both conventionally and hybrid  
by Russia and its allies  potentially  affect s the maritime security  in the 
Black Sea area  and challeng es the resilience of neighboring states.  
 
We, the United Nations, must act with the conviction that a just and 
lasting peace in Ukraine is in everybody’s interest. We welcome the 
ongoing US  and European  efforts in that respect and we urge for an 
immediate, complete and unconditional ceasefire.  
 
In the meantime, Ukraine continues to need our support and solidarity. 
In full accordance with the UN Charter, Ukraine has to right to protect 
its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.  
 
Romania’s support has been substantial and multifaceted and we will 
continue to stand with Ukraine, for as long as needed.  
 
The Government of Romania support s the pursuit of justice and 
accountability on the brutal war of aggression of the Russian Federation 
against  Ukraine.   
 
Looking at the global map , we are concerned about the escalation of 
tensions and conflicts in the Middle East.  An immediate ceasefire in 
Gaza,  the unconditional release of all hostages, as well as adequate 
humanitarian assistance  are merely the first steps towards a permanent 
end to hostilities.  
 
We fully support mediation efforts towards these goals. We also need to 
maintain a political horizon for the implementation of the two -state 
solution . Romania support this approach for over three decades as  the 
only viable basis towards a just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the 
Middle East.  
 
We also remain concerned  about developments on the  African continent 
and we reiterate our commitment to the stability of this region. A 
continent with such a large young population needs peace.  
 
There is  a decrease of the UN peace and security  footprint around the 
world, while conflicts have no end in sight. This is not only because of 
the expected effects of the reforms triggered by the UN80 Initiative.  
 
The reviewing process of the UN peace operations  must respond better 
to current realities. Adaptability, local ownerships and partnerships, 
including with regional organizations , are key attributes for success. At 
the same time, conflict prevention and mediation  should always come 
first, while the separation between special political missions and 
peacekeeping operations should be eliminated, to fully exploit synergies 
and capabilities.  
 
We need to rebuild trust in the mandates of the UN peacekeeping and 
UN Political Special Missions.  
 
From our perspective, there are various instruments within the 
established UN framework, to help maintaining and restoring the 
international peace and security.  
 
The global nuclear non -proliferation regime  is one such key 
instrument, and the constructive cooperation of the Member States with 
the International Atomic Energy Agency is essential.  
 
The Security Council reform  should make further progress in terms of 
transparency, working methods and representativity, in order to become 
more effective and consolidate its credibility, beyond our diplomatic 
circle. Successful steps have already been taken, such as the Veto 
Initiative , but more needs to be done.  
 
The General Assembly  has its own role in the area of peace and security, 
according to the UN Charter. Its complementarity and synergy with the 
Security Council must be put to good use. We welcome the recent 
consensus on the revitalization  process, including with regard to the 
Secretary -General selection and appointment.   
 
Closely linked is to peace and security is ensuring international 
humanitarian  response to emergencies. Romania supports the central 
coordinating role of the UN and a more consistent humanitarian 
diplomacy. We must ensure a fully effective, non -discriminatory and 
unhindered response to the needs of vulnerable and affected people. At  
the same time, an integrated approach to humanitarian, development, 
and peace actions is key to leverage investments on the long run.  
 
Distinguished audience,  
 
We now come to another fundamental pillar of the UN: to fulfil a 
legitimate aspiration towards prosperous, sustainable and inclusive 
societies . We have shown political will, but our actions do not suffice.  
 
Sustainable development cannot be achieved without peace and security, 
protection of human rights as enshrined in all 17 SDGs and adequate 
capacities and financial resources.  
 
Romania’s support to effective official development assistance  is 
reflected in its alignment to best standards in the field and to OECD 
recommendations.  
 
As we approach COP30, we must urgently address environmental 
degradation , including pollution  and biodiversity  loss.   
 
We are also committed to achieving climate neutrality by midcentury  
and we join efforts to keep the 1.5℃ target  alive. We must accelerate a 
just energy transition  and emissions reduction, while ensuring 
energy security . And, since climate change is a threat multiplier, 
Romania supports an integrated approach to the climate and security 
nexus  within the UN system.  
 
Romania remains firmly committed to supporting sustainable 
development globally. We believe that investing in human capital, 
advancing green and digital transitions, and reinforcing institutional 
resilience are key pillars for long -term prosperity.  
 
In the digital age, human rights must be upheld also online. The 
implementation of Global Digital Compact should ensure a  human -
centric, human rights -based approach  to the digital future. Moreover, 
it should harness the achievement of the SDGs .  
 
Thirdly, let us look at the human rights  pillar. Starting with the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights , we have progressively built 
a complex system to ensure that the fundamental rights and freedom are 
promoted, respected and fulfilled.  
 
Our shared values and goals are still not met, but we have the necessary 
means at our disposal. Romania believes we can succeed if we continue 
to uphold the universality, indivisibility, and interdependence of all 
human rights. We cannot  dilute existing commitments  and we cannot 
afford to accept push -backs in ensuring adequate, predictable, and 
sustainable funding of human rights .   
 
Each of us has the abilitiy and responsabity to act, since human rights, 
democracy and the rule of law  come hand in hand. Furthermore, the 
civic space is a vital component of resilient and democratic societies. 
Romania advocates for the meaningful participation of civil society 
actors and human rights defenders  in all UN human rights processes.  
 
The voices of youth  must be heard, and gender equality , in law and in 
practice, is a priority for my country. We celebrate 30 years since the 
adoption of the Beijing  declaration and its Platform for Action and we 
must show real progress in terms of gender parity, combatting 
discrimination and harmful stereotypes, eliminating pay gaps, as well as 
violence and abuse.  We look forward for the upcoming session of the 
Commission of the Status of Women to deliver results on the 
implementation of the Beijing Agend a.  
 
Romania welcome s the adoption of the UN Convention against 
Cybercrime, which will contribute to preventing and combating the 
misuse of technology, besides safeguarding fundamental rights and 
freedoms. Romania has actively contributed to its negotiation and 
believes that many international and regional instruments should be us ed 
in its implementation. For example, the Cybercrime Programme Office 
of the Council of Europe (C -Proc) from Bucharest has achieved major 
impact worldwide, benefiting more than 130 countries, since its 
establishment, more than 10 years ago. The Southeast European Law 
Enforcement Center – SELEC, also hosted by my country, has brought 
an important contribution in the fight against transnational crime in all 
its forms, in the region and beyond.  
 
We should also bear in mind that disinformation  with malign intent has 
dire consequences for democracies .  
In neighboring Republic of Moldova, in about 12 hours polls open for - 
perhaps - the most consequential legislative elections since the country’s 
independence. In the runup to these elections, we have witnessed malign 
foreign interference and disinformatio n on an unprecedented scale - 
directed by Russia through proxies inside and outside Moldova. The 
intention is clear: to deny the Moldovan voters the legitimate right to 
freely decide the future of their own country. To subvert a young and 
vibrant democracy  with the powerful tools of an authoritarian state.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
We must ensure a swift implementation of the Pact for the Future , our 
building block for action on the whole range of UN activities. And we 
must be responsible and ambitious with the UN reform process, 
particularly with regards to the UN80 Initiative . Romania supports 
efforts towards more efficiency and effectiveness  in mandate delivery, 
as well as a system -wide approach,  to harness synergies and eliminate 
duplications.  
 
At the same time, the UN can function properly if it is adequately funded .  
 
In conclusion , I would like to renew our support to the UN system  for a 
better world and a prosperous future!  You can count on Romania and 
Romania counts on the United Nations.  
 
Thank you.    
 