1/13 
 
REMARKS BY MINISTER OLIVIER J.P. NDUHUNGIREHE  
 
80th Session of UNGA  – Rwanda National Statement  
 
New York, 29 September, 2025  
 
 
Your Excellency Annalena Baerbock, President of the 80th General 
Assembly;  
 
Your Excellency Ant ónio Guterres, Secretary General of the United 
Nations;  
 
Excellencies Heads of Delegation;  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
 
Good evening. 
 
1. Allow me to begin by congratulating Her Excellency Annalena Baerbock, 
on her election as President of the 80th Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly.   
 
2. I take this opportunity to thank His Excellency Philémon Yang, the 
outgoing President , for his work and dedicat ed service to  
multilateralism . 
 
2/13 
 
3. Rwanda extends its gratitude to Secretary -General António Guterres for 
his comprehensive report on the work of the United Nations, aimed at 
improving its efficiency .  
 
4. In this regard, Rwanda has formally expressed interest in hosting UN 
agencies, as part of our shared commitment to a cost -effective and 
decentralized UN system.  
 
5. We reiterate our support to the work of the United Nations and the 
Secretary General , particularly in advanc ing peace and security , and 
drive progress on  Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
6. This year, the United Nations turned eighty. This journey has not been 
without challenges.  
 
7. Fast-changing realities, including economic shocks,  and the legitimate 
aspirations of regions long denied a voice, compel us to quickly adapt 
to make the UN fit -for-purpose.  
 
3/13 
 
8. That is why, Rwanda strongly supports reforms, especially of the 
Security Council. The composition of this body does not reflect current 
realities. 
 
9. Africa is a 1.2 billion people -strong continent, where most  of the 
conflicts on the Security Council’s agenda  reside. Therefore,  it cannot 
remain excluded from permanent membership.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
10. The United Nations development pillar remains central to advancing 
peace, prosperity, and dignity for all.  
 
11. We commend the UN development system and its partners for their 
tireless efforts in supporting countries to address pressing development 
challenges, from poverty eradication to climate resilience, and in driving 
forward the ambition of the 2030 Agenda.  
 
12. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development embodies our 
collective aspiration for a just, inclusive, and prosperous world where 
no one is left behind.  
 
4/13 
 
13. Rwanda remains firmly committed to its full implementation, 
recognizing that connectivity, innovation, and inclusive development 
are indispensable drivers of progress.  
 
14. Despite global challenges such as the existential threat of climate 
change and widening technological inequalities, Rwanda has taken 
bold steps to align national priorities with the SDGs.  
 
15. These efforts demonstrate that development, connectivity, and 
environmental stewardship can move forward hand in hand. Yet, the 
persistence of unequal access to finance, technology, and markets 
threatens to widen the gap between those with means and those 
without.  
 
16. In this context solidarity among nations through development 
cooperation has contributed to bridging development gaps. However,  
we believe that it is time to transition from aid to trade, enabling 
developing countries to become self -reliant in a win- win partnership . 
Your Excellen cies  
17. Rwanda regrets the politicization of development cooperation, which 
is used by some development partners  for partisan political reasons 
and interests .  
5/13 
 
 
18. Let me recall that every nation is sovereign and cannot be forced to 
choose between its security and development. Development aid must 
serve as a tool for solidarity and progress, not as a weapon of coercion.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
19. The history of the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda call ed 
on us to be come global advocate s for a peacekeeping that always puts 
civilians first.  
 
20. We pay tribute to the men and women who have worn the blue 
helmet and who have paid the ultimate price in the service  of humanity.  
 
21.  Their legacy is written in the history of the United Nations and lives 
on through the lives they helped save.  
 
22. But peacekeeping must be judged by its results. For the sake of the 
millions who look to the UN for protection, we must ensure that 
peacekeeping  remains true to its purpose.  
 
 
6/13 
 
23. That is why  Rwanda champions  robust peacekeeping, the 
Responsibility to Protect, and the Kigali Principles on the Protection of 
Civilians.  
 
24. Rwanda has led calls for sustainable peace financing, both in Africa 
and globally.  
 
25. Among milestone achievements is the revitalization of the African 
Union Peace Fund, which now mobilizes over 400 million dollars.  
 
26. As a direct result , the Security Council decided to  finance three -
quarters of African Union peace operations for the first time.  
 
27. Beyond the UN, Rwanda contributes to peace support operations on 
a bilateral basis in the Central African Republic and Mozambique.   
 
28. Major progress has been recorded in both countries  in the restoration 
of state authority , capacity building of local security forces  and the fight 
against terrorism .  
 
29. The United Nations was established to spare succeeding generations 
from the scourge of war.  
7/13 
 
30. Yet, eighty years on, conflicts continue to erupt across every 
continent. Rwanda firmly maintains that lasting peace cannot be 
achieved through military means. We have consistently held that only 
genuine, good -faith dialogue offers a sustainable path towar d global 
peace.  
 
31. However, p eacekeeping alone is not enough. Too often, wars return 
because the real obstacles to peace were not resolved . Prevention and 
mediation , and effective peacebuilding  must be our  first resort.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
32. For the Great Lakes region, this lesson is urgent. The current conflict 
in Eastern DRC  is not new. It  is rooted in decades of bad governance, 
marginalization and persecution of minority communities , genocide 
ideology and a persistent  colonial legacy.  
 
33. Rwanda believes peace in Eastern DRC is in everyone’s best interest. 
Our goal has always been —and will remain —the security and wellbeing 
of Rwandans, and the people of our region . 
 
8/13 
 
34. In June this year, Rwanda and the DRC signed a peace agreement  in 
Washington.  It provides a comprehensive framework encompassing 
security, political, and economic components.  
 
35. This achievement was made possible thanks to the strong leadership 
of His Excellency President Donald Trump  of the United States , and 
of His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani , Emir of the 
State of Qatar , whose vision for peace and prosperity in our region , 
Rwanda fully shares .  
 
36. We also acknowledge the vital role played by African -led initiatives, 
notably the joint EAC -SADC process, supported by the African Union  
mediation , for their efforts in favor of peace.  
 
37. Nevertheless, since the signing of this peace agreement,  progress 
has been  moving slowly.   
 
38. While meetings are taking place in Washington to implement the June 
Peace Agreement, the situation on the ground remains deeply troubling. 
The DRC’s renewed militarization —coupled with its continued 
collaboration with genocidal and sanctioned armed groups such as the 
DRC-backed FDLR and VDP/Wazalendo militias —and the deployment 
of attack drones and fighter jets against civilian populations, 
9/13 
 
particularly the Banyamulenge and other Congolese Tutsi, underscore 
the gravity of the crisis.  
 
39. This goes against both the letter and spirit of the Washington 
Agreement.  
 
40. Additionally, this  coalition  is supported by foreign forces, including  
mercenaries , in clear violation of  the 1977 OAU Convention  and the 
1989 UN Convention  against the use of mercenaries.  
 
41. Rwanda condemns these developments and calls on the DRC to 
reject the military solution  and implement in good faith the Washington 
Peace Agreement which is a golden opportunity to end this conflict that 
has lasted for far too long.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
42. Since 1999, the United Nations has maintained a robustly mandated 
peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
(MONUSCO) to help address the conflict.  
 
10/13 
 
43. Yet, despite its efforts, the mission has not succeeded in halting the 
proliferation of armed groups, especially the eradication of the DRC -
backed FDLR.  
 
44. Instead, MONUSCO has ended up working alongside a coalition that 
includes the FDLR, going against more than twenty Security Council 
resolutions calling for the neutralization of that group.  There is an urgent 
need to review the legal conformity of MONUSCO’s mandate.  
 
45. Of particular concern to Rwanda is the emergence of 
VDP/Wazalendo militias, armed and supported by the DRC 
Government , which are committing countless abuses.  
 
46. Their brutality, methods and ideology bear an alarming resemblance 
to that of the genocidal militias of 1994  in Rwanda .  Strong action is 
needed to put an end to this  dangerous development before it is too late.  
 
Excellencies,  
 
47. Human rights are a major pillar of the United Nations . Rwanda rose 
from the ashes of genocide  in 1994 by placing human dignity, unity, and 
accountability at the center of our governance.  
11/13 
 
 
48. We thank the United Nations for establishing the International Day of 
Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi, commemorated 
every April 7th.  
 
49. We also thank the Secretariat and the many Member States who have 
established genocide memorials on their soil, as a lasting pledge to 
never forget.  
 
50. Equally, we  commend  the work of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for Rwanda, and the Residual Mechanism, for prosecuting genocide 
perpetrators .  
 
51. However, Rwanda  is deeply concerned about the persisten ce of 
genocide ideology and related crimes in Eastern DRC , under the watch 
of the international community and the UN itself.   
 
52. We call on the international community to not turn a blind eye, once 
more, for what is clear to see.  
 
53. The targeting, persecution, and massacre of Congolese Tutsi, 
including Banyamulenge communities , amounts to crimes against 
humanity which have all the  early warning signs of a Genocide .   
12/13 
 
 
54. Indeed, Genocide follows a pattern . It follows clear stages . It is not an 
umbrella term; it is defined by international law.  
 
55. Genocide targets a  specific group for who they are , with the intent to 
exterminate  them as such.  
 
56. No amount of calculated  cynicism can rewrite the truth 
and  recast perpetrators as victims, or victims as perpetrators. 
These are deni alist behaviors often deployed by perpetrators of 
these crimes . 
 
57. No claims from a  government arming  a genocidal militia will 
change the facts of history . Providing weapons and financing to a 
group with a proven genocidal record and ongoing intent is nothing 
less than complicity in the crime itself.  
 
58. If there are crimes in the DRC committed for economic gains, they 
have clear names: corruption,  bad governance, and the 
embezzlement of public funds.   
 
13/13 
 
59. To conclude, Excellencies, Rwanda stands ready to work alongside 
all Member States to ensure that the United Nations remains a force for 
peace, justice, and sustainable development.  
 
60. While the challenges and solutions for multilateralism are clear, it is 
political will that must guide us today to build a UN fit for purpose.  
 
61. Together, we must build an organization capable of addressing the 
needs of billions across the globe, tackling human rights abuses, 
climate change, and responding to an increasingly interconnected 
world for successive generations to come.  
 
I thank you.  