1 Only the spoken word is authentic Speech by H.E. Mr. Bassirou Diomaye Diakhar Faye President of the Republic of Senegal On the occasion of the High-Level Segment of the 80th ordinary session of the United Nations General Assembly 2 Only the spoken word is authentic Madam President of the General Assembly, Dear colleagues, Mr. Secretary General, Ladies and Gentlemen, Distinguished delegates, Madam President, On behalf of the Senegal, I thank your predecessor and wish you every success in your presidency of this 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly. 3 I renew to the Secretary General, Mr. Antonio GUTERRES, our constant support in the exercise of his high office in the service of Member States. We meet today, in these symbolic places of universal dialogue, as bearers of the weight of history and the urgency of the present. The theme of this session, “Better together: 80 years and more for peace, development and human rights” reminds us, in fact, of the founding pact of the United Nations; a pact of peaceful coexistence, collective security and an international order based on law. On this basis, the United Nations has made undeniable progress in solidarity cooperation for the prevention of conflicts, the promotion of international peace and security, and the resolution of disputes. Likewise, significant progress has been made in the codification of universal standards for the protection of human rights and a more secure and peaceful international order. 5 But eighty years after the creation of the United Nations, the world is wavering again, as if we were overtaken by the excesses which led humanity to two major catastrophes in the space of a generation. We are experiencing times of great turbulence, unprecedented challenges and multiple uncertainties: expansion of terrorism, persistence of old and new conflicts, climate change, deep economic crisis, decline in international solidarity and high risk of disintegration of multilateralism. 6 I have not forgotten the relaunch of the arms race, including in cyberspace. The most worrying thing is the distressing dehumanization of a world of selective emotions, according to interests and geopolitical issues. There can be no justice based on law when what takes the place of international order is governed by the logic of double standards, the law of the strongest and partisanship. In this worrying context, Africa remains confronted with armed conflicts, terrorism, particularly in the Sahel, cross-border crime and political instability. Faced with so many challenges, our approach should be integrated, combining prevention, resilience and targeted responses. Peace and security come at a price. Let us give ourselves the means to assume this through predictable and sustainable financing of peace support operations in Africa, with adequate equipment, and robust mandates and rules of engagement. This is the only way to confront the scourge of terrorism and restore a minimum of security and stability in the affected areas. I hereby renew Senegal's solidarity with brother countries engaged on a daily basis in the fight against terrorism. In the Middle East, the Palestinian people continue to experience the worst calamity, which words can no longer even express. Under the daily din of bombs, all limits were exceeded. We can neither be silent nor look away. Gaza no longer lives. Gaza, land of tears, blood and sweat, has become a hell for millions of souls of all ages, 9 trapped in an open-air prison. Men, women and children die every day, deprived of food, water and health care. Senegal reiterates its firm condemnation of this tragedy which nothing can justify. In his As Chairman of the Committee for the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Senegal considers that only the creation of an independent and viable Palestinian State will bring lasting peace for all parties, each within secure and internationally recognized borders. 10 Ladies and Gentlemen, Eighty years ago, the founding fathers committed, through the creation of the UN, to preserving future generations from the scourge of war which, twice in the space of a quarter of a century, had caused millions of deaths and untold suffering. On behalf of Senegal, I pay tribute to the pioneers and all those who embodied the universal values ​​of the Organization, sometimes at the risk of their lives. In this world in crisis, the principles and actions must remain the same: Peace rather than conflict; 11 justice rather than indifference; partnership rather than power relations. But this is only possible through strong and revitalized multilateralism, to make it a unique framework of action for peace and stability, through dialogue, consultation and the peaceful resolution of disputes. The survival of multilateralism requires that it rediscover its fundamental principles: shared responsibility and active solidarity, respect for international law and universal justice, in accordance with the 12 Statutes of the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court. Furthermore, we cannot ignore the imperative to reform global political, economic and financial governance. The UN, through its universal vocation, must act as a pioneer, deliberations and decisions that are more democratic, more legitimate and more representative of its member states which have increased from 51 in 1945 to 193 today. I renew Senegal's support for the Ezulwini consensus for a 13th fair and equitable representation of Africa in the Security Council. It is also time to establish fairer and more inclusive global economic and financial governance, to meet the real needs of financing sustainable development. We all know that public assistance is not the solution. Other levers exist, in particular: ➢ a fair global tax framework so that tax is paid where wealth is produced; 14 ➢ access to credit under sustainable conditions so that management of the debt burden does not hinder the development efforts of our countries; ➢ finally, the effective implementation of the Seville commitment, the pact for the future and the Sustainable Development Goals for expanded access to health, water, food, education, energy and digital technology. Global warming also deserves our attention. It is not a threat but an existential question, a reality 15 which hits hardest those who contribute the least, such as Africa with less than 4% of global emissions. And yet, droughts, floods, coastal erosion and food insecurity now punctuate the lives of our populations. It’s a double punishment that has become unbearable. Senegal renews its commitment to the Paris climate agreement and calls for a just and equitable climate transition, through the exploitation of our available resources for universal access to electricity and the start of competitive industrialization. The fight against global warming will undoubtedly be done with substantial funding for adaptation, simplification of access to climate funds and guarantee of technology transfers. Senegal welcomes the creation of the Fund to respond to losses and damage and calls for the mobilization of international solidarity to build up its resources, in order to finance operations on the ground. 17 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Faced with emergencies and numerous and complex challenges, we we are not deprived. The world has the means to feed the hungry, educate our children, care for the sick and silence the guns. The real obstacle is neither financial nor technical nor material. It is part of the political will to make multilateralism an instrument of collective solidarity; of cooperation rather than confrontation, for a future where human dignity will be at the heart of our decisions. 18 So, let us make this 80th anniversary of the United Nations not the observation of an exhausted order, but the starting point of a new hope: that of a renovated and more effective Organization serving the peoples it embodies. Senegal remains faithful to its commitment to work in this direction with all members of the Organization; ready to build bridges, ready to carry out reforms, ready to continue our common work for a world of peace, justice and solidarity. I wish every success to the work of the 80th session of the General Assembly. Thank you for your kind attention.