1 
 MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS  
SINGAPORE  
28 SEPTEMBER 2025  
  
 
  
NATIONAL STATEMENT BY  
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE DR VIVIAN 
BALAKRISHNAN TO THE  
80TH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY ,  
NEW YORK, 27 SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
“Renewing Our Commitment to Multilateralism in an Era of Turbulence”  
  
 
Source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs Singapore - Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Vivian Balakrishnan's National Statement at the General 
Debate of the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, 27 September 2025  
 
  
Mdm President, Your Excellencies,  
  Eight Decades of Peace and Prosperity  
  
1 The 80 years since the end of the Second World War has been a unique period in 
history. The ﬁrst half of the 20
th century was amongst the bloodiest periods known to 
mankind.  
  
2 However, the victors of World War Two were most unusual. Instead of collecting the 
spoils and imposing their wills on the vanquished, they decided that it was in their own 
2 
 enlightened self -interest to build and underwrite a system where sovereign equality, 
territorial integrity and political independence of each nation, big or small, would be 
protected. Where the interactions of states – in security, trade, development – wer e 
founded on a set of commonly agreed rules, international law, and trust. The ultimate goals were peace, prosperity and progress for all. And the centrepiece of this was the United Nations and the UN Charter. 
  
3 The UN Charter provided the framework to govern the interactions between 
sovereign states. The International Court of Justice (ICJ) stood as the principal judicial 
organ of the UN, offering states a forum to settle disputes under the rule of law, peaceful ly. 
For small states, it was a world that operated on principles and international law, where 
might did not make right.  
  
4 The stability and predictability offered by this system allowed all countries to 
develop their economies, leverage on one another’s strengths, and to accelerate 
development. There was unparalleled dissemination of technology, ideas, and intellectual property. Trade grew signiﬁcantly, and companies built global supply chains based on the 
principles of comparative advantage and efficiency. Singapore, as a tiny city state in the heart of Southeast Asia, a small and open economy – we rode on these mega -trends. That 
is why in 60 years a hardworking and disciplined people have built our per capita GDP from US$500 in 1965 to around US$85,000 today.  
  
5 This multilateral system, founded on international law, also helped us to manage 
the global commons. For instance, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. It grants freedom of navigation and overﬂight as a universal right – crucial for an 
island city state like Singapore which depends on trade. It also provides the foundation for 
coordinating global efforts on sea -level rise, pollution, and the l oss of biodiversity. 
  
6 Meanwhile, specialised UN agencies, such as the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO), set common rules and standards to enhance safety and efficiency of all these essential arteries. 
  
3 
 7 Of course, the system was not perfect. The rules were not always applied equally, 
and international law was not always respected. But nevertheless there was a clear 
framework, and people and states knew what was right and what was wrong.  
  
8 The ﬁrst few decades after 1945 were marked by decolonisation and the expansion 
of the membership of the UN. The Cold War spawned several proxy wars around the world, 
including some in our region. But thankfully, as a world, we avoided another world war 
between superpowers. Mutually assured destruction deterred the use of nuclear weapons – although we all know there were a few close shaves.  
  
9 For small, newly independent states and especially for those of us who were able to 
achieve national cohesion and effective governance, the last 80 years, on the whole, was a favourable period of peace, prosperity, and progress.  
  
A Dangerous and Uncertain Era  
  
Mdm President, Excellencies,  
  
10 However, the post -War world order that I have just described has come to an end. 
The current distribution of economic weight, technological sophistication and military strength today is very different from the world of 1945. It is obvious that the UN and the other international organisations have not evolved to keep up with the times.  
  
A More Turbulent World  
  
11 Add another factor – the primary underwriters of the old world order have now 
decided to take a more transactional, a narrower view of their national interests, and are less willing to provide public goods. The sharper strategic context between super -powe rs 
has also made them less able to cooperate, less able to underwrite, less able to manage the global commons.  
  
4 
 12 Consequently, today the world has become more turbulent, more uncertain, and in 
some places, more violent. The erosion of respect for the principles of the UN Charter; the 
egregious violations of international law and international humanitarian law have 
unfortunately become more common; as have violations of sovereignty and territorial 
integrity.  
  
  
13 The current wars which we all witness in the Middle East, Ukraine, and parts of 
Africa reﬂect this tragedy. In all conﬂict zones, too many innocent lives are lost, 
preventable famines occur, and impunity abounds. The humanitarian situation in Gaza is dire and shocking. Singapore hopes there will be an immediate ceaseﬁre, an immediate 
and unconditional release of all hostages, and for immediate access to humanitarian aid, food, and medical care for the civilians in Gaza.  
  
14 Singapore will recognise the State of Palestine when it has an effective government 
that accepts Israel’s right to exist and categorically renounces terrorism. Singapore cannot 
recognise any unilateral annexation of occupied territory because this would b e a ﬂagrant 
breach of international law. If the situation continues to deteriorate, or if Israel takes further 
steps to extinguish a two -State solution, we will then have to reconsider our position on 
when to recognise a Palestinian State. 
  
15 In Ukraine, a permanent member of the Security Council has to comply with the UN 
Charter. We must also not forget the victims in Sudan and other conﬂict zones throughout the world.  
  
Multilateral Trading System Disrupted  
  
Mdm President, Excellencies,  
  
16 The geopolitical shifts have also disrupted the multilateral trading system. Decades 
of progressive trade liberalisation and investments expanded opportunities and prosperity all over the globe. But today, those are at risk. The tariffs and export control s are being used 
5 
 as levers to secure unilateral advantage, including sometimes, to address non-trade 
related issues. The repudiation of the principle of Most Favoured Nation (MFN), which is a cornerstone of the WTO and GATT systems, erodes a transparent rules -based multila teral 
system, giving way to a system where trade agreements approximate bilateral arm-wrestling matches. It is obvious that this will be to the detriment of small, trade -dependent 
states everywhere.  
  
Management of Global Commons Hamstrung  
  
17 In such a fragmented world, we risk compounding the tragedy of the commons 
because collective action for long term good becomes even more elusive. Climate change and pandemics are existential problems that no single country can resolve on their own. If I may add, all of us need to base our decisions on scientiﬁc evidence and a commitment to fairness – both to current and future generations.  
  
Doubling Down on Multilateralism  
  
18 Notwithstanding this prevailing pessimism, Singapore believes that the multilateral 
system and international law, underpinned by the UN, still remains the best way to uphold 
global peace and prosperity in a fair and inclusive way. As a small state, we cannot afford to be passive, or fatalistic, or pessimistic. In fact, we are here to call on all of us to double 
down on multilateralism founded on international law. 
  
19 Even small states and middle powers have the agency and we have strategic 
autonomy to collectively protect our long -term national interests and the global commons. 
Singapore will support the UN80 process to strengthen this institution and the multilateral  
system.  
  
Continued Commitment to Multilateralism  
  
6 
 20 The good news is that actually the multilateral system still works. Let me cite a few 
success stories.  
  
a.              The BBNJ Agreement will enter into force on 17 January 2026. Earlier this week, we 
exceeded the 60 ratiﬁcations necessary to bring this into force. It is a legally binding treaty to conserve and sustainably use marine biodiversity beyond n ational jurisdiction. We 
congratulate Ambassador for International Law Rena Lee of Singapore who presided over these very difficult negotiations that led ultimately to the consensus, and I emphasise the word consensus, adoption of the historic BBNJ Agreeme nt in June 2023.  
  
b.              In July, to cite another example, we achieved consensus on the Final Report of the 
Open -Ended Working Group on Cybersecurity, which strengthened the normative 
framework for responsible State behaviour in cybersecurity. We also agreed to est ablish 
the Global Mechanism on Cybersecurity as a permanent home for this work at the UN. Mr 
Burhan Gafoor, the PR of Singapore to the UN, had the honour and the burden of chairing 
this Open-Ended Working Group over the past ﬁve years.  
  
c.              To give you a third example, in 2024, two World Intellectual Property Organization 
Treaties on IP, the Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge (GRATK) and the Riyadh Design Law Treaty (RDLT) were concluded under the leadershi p of Mr Daren 
Tang. 
  
21 These three examples demonstrate that even in these fractured, fractious times, it is 
possible to come together to manage our global commons, and to achieve agreement and 
consensus. This does not mean that we will always reach agreement on every issue but it is 
vital that the UN remains an arena for continued dialogue and discussions so that 
compromises can be reached, solutions can be found, even for the most hotly contested 
issues.  
  
22 The key to the multilateral system for small states is international law. On this note, I 
am proud to share that Singapore will nominate Ambassador Rena Lee as a candidate for the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which is the principal judicial organ of the UN. Our 
nomination underscores Singapore’s deep commitment to upholding international law, 
7 
 and support for the ICJ. If elected, Ambassador Lee will only be the second person and the 
ﬁrst woman from Southeast Asia to serve on this Court.  
  
The Imperative for Reform  
  
Mdm President, Excellencies,  
  
23 Just as the world has changed dramatically in the last 80 years, it is also clear that 
the UN needs to reform to be ﬁt for the next stretch. We need a more representative and a more inclusive UN that reﬂects current realities.  
  
24 The UN Charter confers on the UN Security Council the “primary responsibility for 
the maintenance of international peace and security”. It clearly needs reform to better fulﬁl this mandate. The increasing, and if I may add, cynical use of vetoes by the P 5 must be 
constrained and the wider UN membership must reach agreement on how this veto is to be exercised in the future. We commend the role played by the Elected Members of the 
Council, which gives the wider membership of the UN greater agency in addre ssing the 
pressing issues of the day. We also believe it is important to strengthen the relationship 
between the Security Council and the General Assembly.  
  
25 We need a UN that delivers for real people on the ground. Clean water. Education. 
Pandemic preparedness. Social mobility. Jobs. And an international ﬁnancial architecture that delivers stability, prospects of progress for all. These are the building bloc ks for 
sustainable development and human dignity. The commitments made at the Summit of the 
Future last year signaled our collective resolve to implement the SDGs (Sustainable 
Development Goals). 
  
26 The UN needs to be future -ready and to harness the potential of emerging 
technologies like AI as a force for good, for all. Early, constructive and inclusive multilateral 
engagement is essential. AI’s transformative force can aid conﬂict prevention, peacekeeping, and humanitarian operations. But you all know that there are also 
downsides and dangers, and it requires guardrails, so that it can be harnessed responsibly.  
8 
   
Our Collective Responsibility  
  
Mdm President, Excellencies,  
  
27 The ﬁrst Foreign Minister of Singapore said it best sixty years ago in 1965: “Despite 
cynics who focus attention on its many shortcomings, Singapore has faith in the future of 
the United Nations simply because without it there is no worthwhile future for  humanity.”  
  
28 These words still ring true today. So together, let us ensure that this institution 
continues to serve as humanity's best hope for peace and prosperity for all of us.  
  
Thank you, Excellencies.  
 