Speech by the Minister of Foreign Affairs  
of the Republic of San Marino  
H.E. Luca Beccari  
80th Session of the UN General Assembly  
New York, 2 7 September 20 25 
 
Madam  President,  
Mr. Secretary -General,  
Excellencies,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of San Marino, I 
would like to congratulate H.E. Annalena Baerbock on her election 
as President of the 80th Session of the UN General Assembly and to 
wish her a fruitful work.  
The Republic of San Marino supports the priorities of your 
programme and ensures you, Madam  President, full cooperation in 
all works of the General Assembly.  
I would also like to extend my special thanks to Secretary General 
António Guterres for his energy and determination in leading the 
United Nations in these difficult and challenging times . 
 
 
 
 2 
Madam  President,  
We are meeting at a moment of profound global transformation. 
The global order is undergoing fundamental shifts — impacting 
trade, technology, and international cooperation. In such times, the 
enduring value of a rules -based multilateral system becomes eve n 
more critical.   
The eightieth anniversary  of our Organization provides an 
opportunity for the United Nations membership to reflect on the 
enduring significance and relevance of the Charter of the United 
Nations.  
As geopolitical dynamics change and new global challenges emerge, 
this year’s General Debate must  strengthen our collective 
reaffirmation of the spirit of San Francisco and the founding 
principles of the United Nations enshrined in the Charter.  
Our meeting in the General Assembly not only honour s the legacy 
of the United Nations but also regenerates  the continued 
cooperation in the pursuit of a more peaceful, just, and sustainable 
world.  
 
Madam  President,  
Unfortunately, the search for peace remains as urgent today as it was 
in 1945, emphasizing the need for renewed commitment, collective 
action, and stronger multilateral efforts .  
Conflicts continue to  rise in different parts of the world, inflicting 
immense human suffering and devastation. If we want that the UN 
 3 
remains a light of hope for those who are experiencing the despair 
of the war, we must advance  our strategies for prevention, 
mediation, and resolution of conflicts.  
We acknowledge the essential role of the UN in delivering life -
saving assistance and protection to millions of people in countries 
and areas that are enduring conflicts, such as the Horn of Africa, the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusal em, the 
Sudan, Ukraine, Yemen and beyond.  
But this is not enough : We, member States, must do more in 
advancing international peace and security, guided by the Charter 
and the mandates of the General Assembly and the Security 
Council.  
 
Madam  President,  
The war of aggression against Ukraine brought dramatic 
consequences for the civilian population, including civilian death, 
the destruction of vital infrastructures, and massive displacement.  
San Marino condemns the Russian aggression against Ukraine and 
supports Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity within its internationally recognised borders.  
We remain committed to ensure that Russia is held fully accountable 
for its war of aggression against Ukraine.  
At the same time, San Marino welcome s all international efforts for 
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine in line with the 
 4 
UN Charter, the resolutions of the General Assembly, and 
international law.  
 
Madam President,  
The humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in Gaza and the West Bank 
is unbearable and remains one of the most painful and long -standing 
tragedies of our time. San Marino condemns unequivocally the 
horrific terror attacks perpetrated by Hamas on 7 October and calls 
once again for the immediate and unconditional release of all 
hostages.  
At the same time, we reiterate our call for an immediate and 
permanent ceasefire, and for full, safe, and unhindered humanitarian 
access to the affected civilian population. Nothing can justify the 
collective punishment of the Palestinian people through 
indiscriminate bombing, starvation  and displacement. The 
continued expansion of settlements, including highly sensitive 
projects such as E1, together with the devastation in Gaza, threatens 
to erase the very possibility of peace. Unless we act with unity and  
determination, the vision of two peoples living side by side in dignity 
and security will be lost.  
It is in this dark hour that responsibility becomes urgent. On 15 
May, our Parliament unanimously mandated the Government to 
recognize the State of Palestine within this year. Today, before this 
Assembly, we announce the fulfilment of  that mandate. San 
Marino officially recognizes the State of Palestine  as a sovereign 
 5 
and independent State, within secure and internationally recognized 
borders, in line with the resolutions of the United Nations.  
Having a State is the inalienable right of the Palestinian people. It is 
not, and can never be, a reward for Hamas.  
This decision is consistent with the message delivered last July at the 
High -Level Conference co -chaired by France and Saudi Arabia, and 
with the New York Declaration , which called on States to take 
concrete and irreversible steps. By joining today the group of 
countries that move from words to action, San Marino intends to 
send a strong political and diplomatic signal: recognition of Palestine 
is essential to reaffirm  that peace must be built on justice and 
equality.  
San Marino will also continue to support Palestine’s admission as a 
full member of the United Nations.  
 
Madam President,  
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts worldwide.  
The death toll of civilians, including children and women, trapped 
in conflict has reached a shocking number. We cannot remain silent 
in front of such tragedy.  
They  have been targeted, killed, injured, kidnapped and tortured. 
The number of civilians that have been displaced has reached new 
records. Civilians have been deprived of water, food and 
humanitarian assistance.  
 6 
Houses, critical infrastructures, schools and hospitals have been 
targeted and destroyed or damaged, leaving civilians in despair, 
leaving children without educations and patients without health 
care. 
Extensive use of explosive weapons in populated areas have caused 
the majority of civilian casualties in different conflicts. San Marino 
condemns such attacks and calls on all States to support and 
implement the Political Declaration on Explosive Weapons in 
Populated Areas . 
San Marino is deeply concern about violence against children , 
particularly children in situations of conflict . 
As we celebrate  the 20th anniversary of Security Council resolution 
1612 (2005), San  Marino renew s its commitment to the CAAC ’s 
Agenda and support the role of the Special Representative for 
Children and Armed Conflict.  
We are  particularly worried about the high number of grave 
violations against children that have been reported: the denial of 
humanitarian access, killing and maiming of children, the 
recruitment and use of children, abduction, rape and other forms of 
sexual violence.  
San Marino calls on all armed forces and armed groups to 
constructively engage with the United Nations for reaching and 
implementing action plans to end and prevent grave violations 
against children  in accordance with their obligations under 
international law.  
 7 
San Marino also firmly condemn s attacks on schools and hospitals, 
as well as their use for military purposes. We reiterate our support 
for the Safe Schools Declaration . Educational facilities should be 
a safe place for all children, students and teachers.  
We call on all member States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of 
Children in Armed Conflict . We also encourage all parties to 
support other important tools, such as the Paris Principles  and 
Commitments and the Vancouver Principles .  
San Marino reiterates the importance of accountability for all grave 
violations against children. Impunity for the perpetrators of grave 
violations is not acceptable.  
The international community has the duty not only to stop and 
prevent these violations, but also to assist child victims and to work 
for their reintegration.  
Regrettably, violence has increased also against humanitarian actors 
and journalists.  Humanitarian personnel and aid worker are being 
killed in unprecedented numbers.  
Attacks against humanitarian personnel, aid workers and journalists 
must end as they are illegal and unacceptable.   
San Marino firmly condemns such attacks and  cannot remain silent 
against the fact that impunity is becom ing the new normal. Attacks 
on humanitarian personnel cannot be tolerated . Perpetrators must 
be held to account.  
San Marino has recently endorsed the Declaration for the 
Protection of Humanitarian Personnel , developed by Australia 
 8 
with a group of Countries . This Declaration demonstrates a strong 
political will to protect humanitarian personnel and to uphold 
compliance with international law.  
 
Madam President,  
The urgencies and uncertainty underpinning the current 
international context are jeopardizing progress towards sustainable 
development.  
San Marino is concerned about  the crisis that are precluding 
progress es on the SDGs, particularly where terrorism, regional 
conflicts , acts of aggression are unravelling years of achievements.  
Sustainable development  must remain high on our agenda. The 
Pact for the Future , adopted last year, is a crucial opportunity  to 
reinvigorate multilateralism, and turbocharge the SDGs and the 
2030 Agenda .  
We believe that monitoring and evaluati ng the Pact is a decisive part 
of its implementation as it not only enables us to assess progress, 
identify gaps, and make the necessary adjustments, but also helps 
ensure that our collective commitments lead to tangible results.  
With the 2030 Agenda as our collective roadmap, we must act to 
reverse  the current backsliding in the implementation of the SDGs. 
This includes enhanced mobilization of financial resources from all 
sources in order to contribute to eradication of poverty, social 
inclusion, stronger partnerships, and a collective commitment t o 
leave no one behind .  
 9 
Financing for sustainable development  remains an essential 
priority.  
San Marino welcome s the Sevilla Commitment , adopted at the 
Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development , 
concluded in Spain , in July,  which promotes investment in 
sustainable development, addresses the debt crisis afflicting many of 
the world’s poorest countries and gives developing countries a 
stronger voice in the international financing architecture.  
We need to strengthen a rules -based and equitable financial system 
that ensures a more effective and inclusive global economic 
governance . 
 
Madam  President,  
We are concerned by the multiple interlinked crises that are pushing 
our world over the brink, especially developing countries.  
The triple planetary crisis of climate change , biodiversity loss  and 
pollution , must remain at the centre of the UN Agenda.  
Climate change and environmental degradation lead to increased 
instability and conflicts, as well as to human suffering, lack of 
sufficient accessible fresh water , food insecurity, internal 
displacement and forced migration.  
An urgent collective action is required to fully implement the Paris 
Agreement  and keep the 1.5°C temperature goal within reach. We 
must accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels and ensure a 
global, just and inclusive green energy transition.   
 10 
Halting and reversing biodiversity loss and reducing pollution 
must remain solid priorities of the UN as healthy ecosystems are 
vital for achieving the SDGs.  
Malnutrition,  unhealthy diets, unsustainable agriculture, and most 
alarming, the threats of famine caused primarily by ongoing conflicts 
and negative consequences of climate change, take a terrible tool on 
human suffering : addressing food security  must also be at the core 
of the work of the UN.  
In this context, San Marino firmly believes that the fight against 
food loss and waste will contribute to promote food security and 
welcomes all the initiatives aiming at developing awareness in such 
responsible behaviors.  
 
Madam  President,  
Since the foundation of the UN, significant progress has been made 
in advancing the promotion and protection of human rights, but 
inequalities and backsliding persist.  
The world continues to witness persistent violations of human 
rights.  
In 2025, 30 years after the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action, gender equality remains one of the world’s 
greatest challenges – and most transformative opportunities.  
It is extremely important to addres s the root causes of gender 
inequality , alongside efforts to combat gender -based violence in all 
its forms.  
 11 
San Marino supports women, youth and vulnerable groups’ equal, 
full, effective and meaningful participation in all spheres of public 
and political life.  
We support the Declaration on Future Generations , adopted last 
year at the Summit of the Future, which aims at unleashing future 
generations’ full potential through and inclusive and equal access to 
quality education . 
San Marino believes it is essential to safeguard human rights in the 
digital age. In this respect, the Global Digital Compact  is an 
important tool that underscores our collective commitment to 
bridging the digital divide and promoting digital inclusion, creating 
a more equitable and sustainable future and finally ensuring that 
digital technologies are used for the benefit of all humanity.   
Moreover, the establishment of an Independent International 
Scientific Panel on AI  and of the  Global Dialogue on Artificial  
Intelligence Governance  are fundamental to promote scientific 
understanding of AI, and to ensure inclusive multi -stakeholder 
discussion on AI at the UN. It will contribute to building the UN 
membership’s capacity on AI by fostering shared knowledge, 
common understanding, and pooled experiences, equally benefiting 
all stakeholders, particularly from developing countries.   
We are worried about the risks related to new technologies  in the 
military domain . The rapid advances in artificial intelligence have led 
to concerning levels of autonomy in conflicts . Artificial Intelligence 
has been used in conflicts to select targets and make decisions over 
life or death. San Marino believes that meaningful human control 
 12 
must be retained over such decisions, guided by international law 
and ethical principles.  
San Marino is also worried about  the enlargement and upgrading of 
nuclear arsenals . Amid escalating global tensions, the threat of 
nuclear weapons ’ use continue s to pose an exist ential risk to 
humanity . Furthermore, we are witnessing an  unprecedented  rise in 
global military expenditures.  We are walking on a dangerous and 
unpredictable path; we need to redirect our efforts on our 
multilateral system, renewing our commitment to peace through 
diplomacy . 
Madam  President,  
Multilateralism and our international  order  stand on the 
principles of justice and international law. However, in the recent 
years, we have witnessed a progressive erosion of international law 
and the rule of law.  
San Marino believes in the principle that the true rightness is based 
on fairness and ethics, not on brute force .  
The rule of law exists for this reason: to ensure that all States, 
regardless of their power, are held accountable, that a rules -based 
international order with the Charter at its centre, is our best 
guarantee against chaos and war.  
Thanks to its unique role as the centre for setting goals, the United 
Nations serve the collective interest of all nations and people 
transcending any individual State.   
 13 
San Marino reaffirms its commitment to multilateralism, with the 
United Nations at its centre and in particular in the framework of 
the General Assembly, as the most representative body of the 
United Nations on account of its deeply democratic nature, 
universal participation and undisputed legitimacy.  
Accountability is an integral  and essential part of the multilateral 
system. It plays an important role in addressing global challenges, 
fostering trust and legitimacy in international institutions .  
We are deeply worried about the disregard and violations of 
international law.  
The Republic of San Marino reaffirms its full commitment to the 
obligations under human and humanitarian law , such as the 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime 
of Genocide , the Rome Statute and the Geneva Conventions . 
We reaffirm  our full support to the International Criminal Court , 
whose work is crucial in the fight against impunity for genocide and 
crimes against humanity and it represents one of the core elements 
for the implementation of the Responsibility to Protect .  
The Republic of San Marino would also like to reiterate its support 
for initiatives such as the ACT Group’s Code of Conduct  
regarding Security Council action against genocide, war crimes or 
crimes against humanity and the French and Mexican declaration  
on voluntary restraint use of the veto  by the Permanent Members 
of the Security Council.  
 14 
 
Madam  President,  
We need to revitalize the United Nations by reinvigorating the 
multilateralism, if we want to pursue credible solutions to the global 
challenges.  
The SDGs, the 2030 Agenda, the Pact for the Future and the 
Sevilla Commitment  are recent testimonials to our joint 
commitments and to what multilateralism can deliver.  
But this is not enough.  
It is essential to rebuild trust in the potential of the Organization, in 
its leadership, and, most of all, trust between its members and all the 
stakeholders.  
Reforms must remain at the centre of our actions because they are 
crucial to future world stability and maintenance of international 
peace and security.  
The UN80 initiative , launched in March 2025 by Secretary General 
António Guterres  must be an inclusive reform process, capable to 
deliver innovative solutions.  Its purpose is to make the UN more 
efficient, integrated, effective at tackling complex global challenges  
and adjusted to the financial realities .  
We believe that this reform’s efforts should preserve the integrity 
and balance of the three UN pillars on an equal basis  and 
 15 
continue to primarily support those most in need as well as those 
affected by crises, disasters, and armed conflicts .  
 
In conclusion, M adam . President,  
Member States must assume their responsibilities, including that of 
making our organization able to fulfil its mandate, which is to 
protect the citizens of the world.  
It is essential to  find new ways of working together and to ensure 
that multilateral institutions will be able to address the rapid changes 
taking place.  
I would like to reiterate the strong support of the Republic of San 
Marino to all initiatives aimed at implementing the principles 
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.  
 
 
 
 
 