1 National Statement of H.E President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President 
of the Federal Republic of Somalia on the 80th UN General Assembly 
theme of the Year “Better together”  
24 September 2025  
New York  
Your Excellency Antonio Guterres, UN Secretary General,  
Your Excellencies, heads of state and governments  
Ladies and gentleman,  
It is a great honour and privilege to address the 80th UN General Assembly today at a 
time when our world is at a critical juncture. The UN was founded on the principles of 
advancing peace, security, development and progress globally after the destruction of 
the Second World War.  
The UN is the embodiment of our common aspiration for a global governance 
anchored in international law, fairness and equality.  
80 years on since the first UN General Assembly, we should have already been “Better 
Together”  not seeking to justify why we can be better together, today.  
Global challenges  
Across the world, people, and indeed, humanity as whole, is challenged with 
existential obstacles and threats that we can resolve through dialogue, cooperation, 
unity and shared purpose. Yet, instead of seeking to strengthen existing and future 
partnership s and enhancing social solidarity to achieve this, we are in a world of 
adverse competition and increasing governance uncertainty.   
Where we once strived to ask “What is Right”  under international law, today we are 
witnessing the unapologetic rise of national MIGHT  to settle disputes. This is a truly 
dark and dangerous path that threatens the hard -won rules based international order 
we collectively agreed on as UN member states.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentleman,  
While we should be focussed strategically on accomplishing the Sustainable 
Development Goals and leaving no one behind by 2030, the number of fragile states 
and populations living in poverty is increasing globally. Over 30 member states of the 
UN today, including my country, Somalia, are classified as Fragile and Conflict -
affected because of both conflict and social and institutional fragility.  When you add 
the vulnerabilities stemming from climate change, this number is frighteningly higher.  
2 In addition to this, urbanisation is rising at the fastest rate in human history because 
of conflict, climate and lack of economic opportunities in rural communities. 
Furthermore, food insecurity remains a persistent deadly challenge affecting billions. 
According to the World Food Program, “319 million people are facing acute hunger 
in 67 countries” today.  
These stark and startling facts must give us all pause for reflection and thought. If we, 
as a community of nations, are serious about achieving common progress and 
prosperity for all as envisioned in the Sustainable Development Goals, we must re -
double ef forts to strengthen multilateralism, solidarity and shared action for all our 
people and planet.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentleman,  
Somalia, as a proud Non -Permanent Member of the UN Security Council, is working 
tirelessly to promote the ideals and values of peace, stability and shared opportunities 
across the world. We are actively working with all Security Council members and the 
wider UN Membership to find solutions for peace in the Middle East, Africa and 
Europe.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
it is imperative that we address an undeniable injustice in our multilateral system. 
Africa, a continent of 54 sovereign nations, remains the only continent without 
permanent seats at the UN Security Council. This is unsustainable. Some of the most 
pressin g issues that dominate the Council’s agenda directly concern Africa, yet Africa 
has no permanent represenation at the table. Excluding Africa from permanent 
membership is unfair, outdated, and can no longer be justified. True multilateralism 
and global leg itimacy demand that Africa be fully included in the decision -making 
structures of the United Nations.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is imperative that we address an undeniable injustice in our multilateral system. 
Africa, a continent of 54 sovereign nations, remains the only continent without 
permanent seats at the UN Security Council. This is unsustainable. Some of the most 
pressin g issues that dominate the Council’s agenda directly concern Africa, yet Africa 
has no permanent representation at the table. Excluding Africa from permanent 
membership is unfair, outdated, and can no longer be justified. True multilateralism 
and global le gitimacy demand that Africa be fully included in the decision -making 
structures of the United Nations.  
3 Somalia remains deeply concerned by the continued suffering of the Palestinian 
people. The ongoing violence, displacement, and deprivation faced in the occupied 
territories including Gaza demand our collective conscience and urgent action.  
We call for an immediate and lasting ceasefire, unhindered humanitarian access, and 
renewed commitment towards the two -State solution as the only viable path for a just 
and lasting peace in the Middle East.  
Somalia: Security  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentleman,  
Somalia’s unique story of decisively transitioning from conflict to a brighter socio -
economic and political and security future starting from 2012, is the story of real 
national effort supported by truly committed international partners, many of whom 
are r epresented in this room today.  
In fact, Somalia is evidence that multilateralism and global solidarity can make the 
world a better, safer and progressive place. This lived experience is our own 
government’s inspiration for determinedly working for a more just, peaceful and 
progressive w orld within the UN Security Council during our membership because we 
know that we are truly “better together” when we all work in unison.  
At home, we are bravely fighting the last remaining pockets of international terrorism 
while building a strong and sustainable national security architecture. We are working 
closely with all our valuable international partners in defeating the violence ext remism 
ideology, falsehoods and illicit financial systems that facilitate global terrorism. As a 
result of our efforts in Somalia, our people and citizens across the world are safer 
today.    
Of course, while we remain grateful for all the international support to combat 
terrorism, I strongly commend the unwavering commitment and courage of the Somali 
security forces and local community defence forces for their sacrifices, resilience and 
succes s against Al -Shabaab and ISIS. This will continue until we achieve complete 
victory and harmony in our country, region, continent and the wider world. We must 
never give in to cowardly terrorists.  
Governance and politics  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentleman,  
Our government has embarked on a historic journey to undertake universal suffrage 
elections in Somalia for the first time in 57 years. Somalia was Africa’s first democratic 
4 nation and we are proudly returning to this path of inclusive governance once again. 
Today, our national election registration process is ongoing and more than 30 
independent Political Associations have registered to participate in the upcoming 
elections. Our national experience is that nothing is better than a people - centred and 
people -led nation guided by the rule of law to build a unified and prosperous nation.    
Financing development  
The sustainable development goals are the blueprint for achieving dignity, justice and 
equality through real investment in human capital, job creation and social protection 
for the most vulnerable in all our communities. However, it was very clear from the  
forth financing for development conference in Seville earlier this year that the 
financing gap between our ambitions and the reality are very far apart.  
Today, developing nations are facing the triple shock of high debt burdens, higher cost 
of sovereign borrowing and expenditure on recurrent shocks which is impossible to 
budget for annually. The traditional economic model of forecasting predictable 
expendi ture supported by clear revenue streams is no longer this simple.  
Governments of developing nations are also now subjected to real time investment 
cuts in core developmental activities, including health, education and basic 
infrastructure. This is because of realignment of the already dwindling development 
assistance the y used to receive from developing nations. This is not sustainable if we 
as a community of nations are to achieve collective developmental progress together.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentleman,  
In Somalia, we are taking responsibility for our own economic development by building 
on the success of our recent reform based debt relief. Today, we are focused on 
mitigating the excruciating cost of public service investment by continuously raising 
dome stic revenue, strengthening public financial management systems and enforcing 
strict expenditure controls while enhancing transparency and accountability.  
Furthermore, we are committed to benefitting from our strategic location and natural 
resources through trade with our region and the world. In line with the support of this 
ambition, Somalia has joined the East Africa Community, is ratifying the African 
Continental Free Trade Area policies, and our World Trade Organisation process is 
going well.  
Climate emergency  
5 We are resolute in our commitment to combat the devastating effects of climate 
change on the most vulnerable communities, especially those who are unable to 
mitigate and adapt effectively.  
Climate change is wreaking havoc across the world with the most vulnerable countries 
suffering systemic and repetitive meteorological and socio -economic shocks. This is 
devastating economies, destroying livelihoods and diverting limited public resources 
towards mitigation and adaptation responses which take away from other vital social 
investments like education and health.  
The impact of climate change is forcing governments in developing countries, including 
my own, to make impossible financial trade -offs which hamper our own aspirations 
for investing in resilience and development. Around 10% of developing nations’ 
budgets are diverted to responding to climate change.   
This needs to be addressed urgently through the developed industrialised nations by 
meeting their financial obligations for the climate crisis they continue to exacerbate.  
Less than 3% of the global climate finance reaches the African continent  despite 
emitting the least and the disproportionate and disastrous impact on the African 
people. This is unacceptable.  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The resilient Somali people live with the climate crisis every day. For us, climate 
change is not abstract, it is a horrible reality of disrupted and destroyed lives.  
Somalia contributes almost nothing to global emissions, yet we endure some of the 
harshest consequences. Droughts, floods, and rising seas erode livelihoods and 
displace families, threatening to undo the progress we are making towards peace and 
development .  
As a government, we understand that addressing the adverse impact of climate 
change is a Global Public Good that requires strong partnerships and genuine burden 
sharing.  
On our part, Somalia has adopted a National Climate Change Policy, updated our 
Nationally Determined Contribution, and is preparing its first Biennial Transparency 
Report. We are also developing a robust national climate finance strategy to guide how 
we mo bilize and manage resources.  
To ensure these resources are used effectively, we have established the National 
Climate Fund, a dedicated institution to channel climate finance transparently and 
6 directly to communities. On the ground, we are restoring degraded lands, 
strengthening water security, and piloting nature -based solutions that protect both 
people and ecosystems.  
Despite our efforts, accessing climate finance remains too slow and complex. As our 
government strengthens its domestic revenue capacity and initiates the processes for 
pre-arrange disaster risk financing, we call for financial support that is accessible, 
affordable, predictable, and just from international financial institutions and the 
capital markets.  
Nations on the frontlines like Somalia cannot be left to face this crisis alone 
unsupported by the dominant Global Financial Architecture which is not fit for purpose 
in this age of great challenge.    
Conclusion  
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In conclusion, the 80th anniversary of the UN General assembly is the best possible 
opportunity to take stock of our global achievements as far as our common 
commitments to sustainable developments are concerned.  
We quietly transitioned from the Millennium Development Goals to now the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Now, I wonder with the clock rapidly ticking very 
fast towards 2030 what the next acronyms for our global development aspirations 
will be.  
For us, being better together means common ownership, common responsibility and 
genuine burden -sharing on the global achievement of sustainable development 
through investment in a resilient and fair future for all.  
I thank you,  