DRAFT  10 / September 21, 2025  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please check against delivery  
 
 
STATEMENT  
by 
 
Her  Excellency   Jennifer Geerlings -Simons  
President of the  Republic of Suriname  
on the occasion  of the General  Debate 
of the  
80th Session of  the 
United  Nations  General  Assembly  
 
 
New  York  
23 September  2025 
 
 
1 
 GREETINGS  
Your Excellency  Annalena Baerbock, President of the 80th 
Session of the United Nations General Assembly , 
Your Excellency  António Guterres, Secretary General of 
the United Nations,  
Excellencies ,  
Ladies and Gentlemen , 
It is an honor to present my first statement to this dignified  
body today.  
  
Introduction  
Madam President,  
I extend to you, my sincere congratulations on your 
election  to preside over this esteemed gathering.  
 
With your vast  experience and knowledge of international 
affairs, I am confident, that success is guaranteed, during 
your tenure as President of this General Assembly.  
 
In the same vein , I acknowledge, His Excellency, 
Philemon Yang for his skillful leadership of the previous 
session and wish him well in his future endeavors.  
 
Equally we salute and applaud Secretary General 
Guterres, for his leadership of our organization, especially 
 
 
2 
 during this tumultuous time, when the United Nations 
and the world are confronted with so many challenges.  
 
Madam President,  
 
We are here to commemorate a special moment in 
history, as we celebrate the United Nations 80th 
anniversary.  
On behalf of the Government and the People of the 
Republic of Suriname, I express sincere congratulations to 
the international community on this occasion.  
This 80th session  of the General Assembly coincides with 
the 50th anniversary of the i ndependenc e of the Republic 
of Suriname and our membership of this  Organization.  
Peace /80 Years of United Nations (UN@80)  
 
Madam President,  
 
The United Nations played, in some instances, an 
important role in ending colonial rule, advancing human 
rights, and providing hope and a future to the most 
vulnerable in our global community.  
 
 
 
3 
 Equally  our organization provided a forum for discussions 
aimed at adopting a framework for the sustainable 
development agenda.  
 
A journey , that spans over 80 years and which has not 
been without  challenges.  
 
We have come a long way but  have an even longer road to 
travel!  
 
The United Nations is the organization that  provided a 
voice to the global community and worked  to establish a  
balanced  world order, conducive  to development of peace 
and prosperity for all!  
 
The Organization contributed significantly to advancing  
human rights, more specifically the rights of women  and 
children , promoting education for all, and universal 
access to health care .  
 
In some  instances,  the peaceful  resolution of conflicts was 
achieved, preventing misery and saving human lives.  
 
 
Madam President,  
 
 
4 
  
On the other hand,  we must  admit, that  the UN  
sometimes,  regrettably has been unsuccessful in avoiding 
conflicts , wars and violations of human rights . 
 
In Europe and elsewhere, war has returned, displacing 
millions , killing many and threatening global security.  
 
In several other  countries and regions for instance in 
the Middle – East we have witnessed unspeakable terror  
at the hands of terrorist organizations . At this moment 
there are increased occurrences of grave  violations of 
human rights and more specifically the rights of children  
for example  in Gaza . 
Also, Madam President,  within our own Region we have 
not been spared of rising tensions.  
 
It is with  heightened concern that we noted the Secretary 
General’s recent briefing of the Security Council Meeting, 
on the situation in Haiti, mentioning that “the Haitians are 
enduring a perfect storm of suffering”.  
  
Suriname strongly reiterates its position that conflict s 
should primarily be resolved through dialogue.  
 
 
 
5 
 We remind  the international community that Latin 
America and the Caribbean are proclaimed as a Zone of 
Peace.  
 
Madam President , we should reflect and ponder on the 
role and effectiveness of the Organization for the next 80 
years. What do we have to change, what needs to be done 
differently?  
 
The United Nations  will only be successful if all nations 
are committed to the implementation of those matters, we 
agree upon and the resolutions we adopt.  
 
As Member States, we must come to the realization that 
the world in which we established the United Nations 80 
years ago, no longer exist s! 
 
Today,  partially because of the work done by our 
organization, some poor countries have developed 
substantially, economically and otherwise. They  have 
become powers who can’t be ignored any longer.  
 
Madam President,  
 
 
 
6 
 The task ahead, therefore, is that we in the first place, go 
back to the table and renew our vows, to recommit to the 
principles and objectives of the Charter.  
 
This implies that all nations should adhere to the rules 
and regulations agreed upon in order  to attain a peaceful 
world order, in which all people from all regions,  should 
have opportunities for a dignified life.  
 
Furthermore,  the UN should adjust to the world we 
currently live in.  This means that for example , the Security 
Council should be expanded  to include all nations who 
exert major influence in the world.  
 
Exclusion  of these  players will only increase the risk of 
conflict and obstruct the beneficial cooperation , necessary 
for humanity to develop and prosper.  
 
It is  of great importance that all economically and 
otherwise strong countries , maintain a healthy 
competition  that promotes the scientific advancemen t, we 
need for sustainable development.  
 
 
 
7 
 On the other hand , these countries need to  work together 
to guarantee the global peace , so crucial for the existence 
and growth of developing states . 
 
In this  context, Suriname endorses the inclusion of , 
amongst others,  Brazil, India , and a representation of the  
African Continent , for equal membership of the Council.  
 
Equally  we support the CARICOM position for a non -
permanent rotating seat for the Small Island Developing 
States and Low -lying coastal countries.  
  
I would  like to remind member states that my  country has 
presented its candidacy as a non -permanent member of 
the Council for the period 2043 -2044.  
 
Madam President,  
 
The United Nations  must  be a genuine unity of NATIONS, 
if our organization, moving forward,  wants to play a 
positive role for a prosperous future for humanity!  
Suriname  stands firmly for global peace, for the rule of 
law, and for the equal value of every human life. Let us 
work together to create the necessary environment which  
will bring lasting peace to our region and elsewhere.  
 
 
8 
 Considering this , Suriname  once again, calls for the 
lifting of the longstanding embargo against Cuba and its 
people.  
 
Suriname within the United Nations  
Madam President,  
Our rich  history, and extraordinary cultural diversity of 
Suriname’s people, including Indigenous, Maroon, 
Javanese, Hindustani, Creole, Chinese, European and 
more. All living together in a mosaic of cultures and faiths.  
Persons  from Surinamese  Origin living abroad are part of  
the mosaic of our population  and can contribute to socio -
economic  development of the nation.  
We consider this a great asset. Suriname does not have 
diversity - Suriname is diversity , and we keep working 
together to protect and grow our national unity for our own 
wellbeing and as an example of harmony in an often -
divided world.  
My country  also carries immense natural wealth,  and it 
is our vision to create an economy that is  resilient, 
sustainable and inclusive .  
 
 
9 
 Allow  me to share with you some elements of my 
government’s vision on our socio -economic development.  
Together  we strive to build a more resilient and diverse 
economy,  by developing among others, our  tourism and 
agricultural sectors,  strength en our  education al system 
and work towards  universal access  to basic health care . 
Suriname  has a vast tourism potential with it s green and 
lustrous hinterland, many waterfalls, rapids and great 
rivers  for relaxation as well as unforgettable adventures , 
rich biodiversity, cultural treasures and the UNESCO 
acknowledged historical City of Paramaribo . 
Through  cooperation in the agriculture sector with our 
neighbors we aim at improving f ood security  within 
Suriname and the Caribbean Community  (CARICOM) . 
My government  views energy security as a strategic 
priority for national development, regional stability, and 
economic resilience.  
 
With an investment  of more than ten billion US dollars , 
for the development of  our offshore oil and gas , the  
country is getting a new beginning, that will contribute  
significantly to Suriname’s economic growth .  
 
 
10 
 However, oil and gas revenues  should not be the sole 
fundament of our economic development ; hence we are 
open for investments in relevant sectors in our country.    
We are also steadily advancing our energy transition. 
While we already source about 50% of our energy needs 
through hydro power, we are moving toward natural gas 
and other forms of renewable energy as part of our long -
term vision . 
Madam President , I firmly believe that education is the 
foundation upon which every prosperous society is build.  
We are  committed, to invest in our education system, our 
teachers, our children and youth . The  future of my 
country depends on the talents and skills of its people.  
 
 
 
My government  also, strongly reaffirms , its 
commitment to upholding the rights of Indigenous and 
Tribal communities, ensuring that their livelihoods, 
traditions,  knowledge systems are respected and 
preserved , and the acknowledgement of their collective 
land rights .  
 
 
11 
 Strengthening our institutions is high on our agenda.  
Madam President,  
 
Suriname  has worked tirelessly on the prevention of 
diseases and despite the challenges, we have achieved 
results that we as a country can be proud of.  
As of June 30, 2025, Suriname  has officially been declared 
malaria -free by  the World Health Organization  after 30 
years of continuous fight against this disease.  The first in 
the Amazon Region to receive such a recognition.  
We are  aware of the responsibility to remain vigilant, as 
Government as well as a community to ensure that these 
gains are sustained. Suriname’s example showcases that 
we too can surely make a valuable contribution in 
combatting infectious diseases.  
CARICOM  
Madam President,  
The Caribbean Community ( CARICOM ) is expanding its 
outreach and, in this light, Suriname also welcomes the 
recently concluded 2nd Africa –CARICOM Summit, held in 
the Republic of Ethiopia.  
 
 
12 
 This, Madam President  honors the historic, cultural, and 
human bonds between our regions. Suriname also 
acknowledges the  CARICOM Ten Point Plan for Reparatory 
Justice, which has our full and strong endorsement.  
We will, furthermore , continue to contribute within 
CARICOM , aiming at enhanc ing the organization’s 
geopolitical influence . 
  
Climate  
Madam President,  
Despite our commitment  to the Paris Agreement 10 
years ago, the climate crisis is worse  than we feared.  
Our countries , have least contributed to climate change, 
but are hit the hardest by its effects, directly impacting the 
livelihoods and economic growth of our peoples.  
 
Suriname  calls for the urgent attention of the international 
community to address the detrimental impact of climate 
change facing the small island developing states and 
countries with low lying coastal areas.  
Our forest stands strong . More than 90 percent of our 
land is  covered by rainforest . “Your eyes have never 
seen so much green!”  Suriname is one of the three 
carbon -negative countries on Earth . 
 
 
13 
 Since 1992 , our forest has absorbed nearly 290 million 
tons of carbon, and each year we capture more than we 
emit,  and we want to keep it that way.  
The protection and conservation of our forest has been 
a priority . We have been logging  sustainably  for decades 
and did so with the Sustainable Tropical Rainforest 
Management System developed in Suriname. An  
ecological approach to forestry.  
Also,  the Indigenous and Tribal communities protect the 
forest by their continued stewardship.  
We are proud of the way we did it, b ut pride  alone  does 
not pay the bills  and does not develop the Indigenous 
and Tribal communities .  
 
Madam President,  
We must not forget that t hese forests are in competition 
with the potential development of vast resources such as 
gold, diamond, bauxite and more.  
We need to  make difficult choices.  We want to keep our 
forests coverage  at a minimum of 90%, but w e cannot 
do it alone .  
 
 
14 
 The time has come for the world’s largest emitters to 
share in this responsibility, not only with words, but with 
action, justice and finance.   
Suriname  strongly calls for global action: predictable 
climate finance for high -forest ed, low-deforestation 
countries; fair recognition of real carbon removals; and 
direct support for the communities who live in and 
protect these forests.  
Suriname , Madam  President therefore endorses the 
initiative of the COP 30 Presidency to launch the Tropical 
Forest Forever Facility (TFFF ) and calls upon the 
international community to contribute to its success.  
 
 
 
Madam President,  
Suriname, as mentioned previously, takes pride  in 
being an example of peaceful coexistence, having 
different cultures , religions, and the tradition to live 
together in respect and solidarity.  
This is our gift to the world : the proof that harmony can 
prevail.  
 
 
15 
 As stated upon  our admission to the United Nations (UN) 
in 1975, our Republic indicated our willingness to engage 
with the international community.  
Madam President , my country reiterates its strong 
commitment to multilateralism, one of  humanity's most 
important achievement s, which needs our protection in 
this time of change.  
In closing,  Aggression  and military force should be 
replaced with peaceful resolutions and dialogue.  
As a matter of urgency, I  call on every member  state to  
keep the peace , protect the planet and all human rights . 
Suriname has shown the world that living sustainably 
together is possible: WE ARE BETTER TOGETHER!   
Thank you, Grantangi!  