 
 
 
 بـــــــيــــــــــــــــــــان 
رئيس الجمهورية العربية السورية  
 
فخامة السيد أحمد الشرع  
 
أمام  
 
الجمعية العامة لألمم املتحدة  
الدورة 80 
 
 نيويورك في 24/09/ 2025 
  

1 In the name of God, the Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate,  
The Syrian story is one that stirs emotions, where pain  is mingle d 
with hope.  
It is a story of a struggle between good and evil, between the weak 
and strong , in which there is support  by none other than  God  or 
powerful falsehood, possessing all instruments of killing and 
destruction.  
Our story is a lesson drawn from history, a true representation of 
noble human values.  
In this eternal battle between truth and falsehood, the Syrian 
story is narrated to tell a new chapter of this struggle —one 
radiant and great with creativity, filled with confrontation and 
determination, with patience, suffering, pain, sacrifice, and 
redem ption, steadfast in noble values and sound traditions, 
founded on preparation, serious work, and constant reliance 
upon God.  
All of these are tools that aid truth in overcoming falsehood.  
 
2 Madam President of the General Assembly,  Mr. Secretary -
General,  
Your Majesties, Excellencies, Highnesses, and Distinguished 
Delegates,  
Peace be upon you.  
I have come to you from Damascus, the capital of history and the 
cradle of civilizations.  
That beautiful land that taught the world the meaning of 
civilization, the value of humanity, and peaceful coexistence, to 
become a beacon for the world.  
Yet Syria, for sixty years, fell under the rule  of a tyrannical regime 
that ignored the value of the land it ruled, and oppressed a kind 
and peaceful people.  
Our people endured oppression, tyranny, and deprivation for long 
years, until they rose demanding freedom and dignity —only to 
be met with killing, torture, burning, rape, and displacement.  
The former regime waged war on our people with the vilest 
instruments of murder and torture: barrel bombs, chemical 
3 weapons, summary executions, prison torture, forced 
displacement, fueling sectarian and ethnic strife, and even using 
drugs as a weapon against both our people and the world.  
It tore apart our country, destroyed the great centers of our 
history, and brought in foreign forces, militias, and gangs from 
across the globe, mortgaging our beautiful homeland.  
That regime killed nearly one million people, tortured hundreds 
of thousands, displaced around fourteen million, and destroyed 
close to one million homes ove r the heads of their families . 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Our unprotected p eople  were targeted with chemical weapons in 
more than 200 documented attacks.  
Yes… our children, our women, and our youth inhaled poisonous 
gases.  
The regime did all this to silence the voice of truth. It rejected 
every political settlement offered to it and left no path to peaceful 
resolution.  
Thus, the people had no choice but to mobilise  themselves and 
prepare for the great historic confrontation through a swift 
4 military operation —an operation that brought down a system of 
oppression that had lasted sixty years with all its backers.  
It was an operation filled with mercy, goodness, forgiveness, and 
reconciliation.  
A military campaign that caused no displacement and killed no 
civilians, crowned with a victory free of vengeance and enmity.  
In it, the people regained their rights and triumphed over 
injustice.  
Yes… we triumphed for the oppressed, the tortured, and the 
forcibly displaced.  
We triumphed for the mothers of martyrs and the families of the 
missing.  
We triumphed for all of you, for the world.  
We triumphed for the future of our children and yours.  
We paved the way for the return of refugees to their homes.  
We dismantled the drug trade that had once spread from our land  
to yours under the former regime . 
5 And Syria, through this victory, has transformed from a country 
exporting crises to a historic opportunity for peace, stability, and 
prosperity for itself and the region as a whole . 
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The unique Syrian achievement and popular unity prompted 
some to attempt to stir sectarianism and internal strife, seeking 
division and fragmentation once again.  
But the Syrian people, had enough  awareness, to prevent  a new 
catastrophe  and refused to return Syria to its old square of ruin.  
The state responded by forming fact -finding committees and 
giving the United Nations the necessary permission to conduct its 
own inquiries —both reaching the same transparent conclusions 
unprecedented in our history.  
And I pledge to bring every hand stained with the blood of 
innocents to justice.  
Meanwhile, Israeli threats against our country have not ceased 
since December 8 until today.  
6 Israeli policies contradict the international position supportive of 
Syria and its people, exploiting our transitional stage and 
threatening the entire region with new cycles of conflict whose 
end no one can foresee.  
In response, Syria employs dialogue and diplomacy to overcome 
this crisis , and w e reaffirm our commitment to the 1974 
Disengagement Agreement and call on the international 
community to stand with us in confronting these dangers and in 
upholding Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
From the very moment the former regime fell, we set out a clear 
strategic policy built upon three pillars: balanced diplomacy, 
security stability, and economic development.  
We filled the power vacuum, called for an inclusive national 
dialogue, and announced a government of competence.  
We strengthened the principle of participation and established a 
National Commission for Transitional Justice and another for the 
missing, ensuring justice and fairness for those wronged.  
7 We are now proceeding toward electing representatives of the 
people in the legislative council.  
We restructured civil and military institutions, dissolving all 
previous formations under the principle of ensuring weapons 
remain solely in the hands of the state.  
Through intensive diplomatic activity, Syria restored its 
international relations, forged regional and global partnerships, 
and achieved the gradual lifting of most sanctions.  
We call now for the complete lifting of these sanctions , so they no 
longer shackle the Syrian people or strip them once again of their 
freedom.  
Investment laws have been amended, and major regional and 
international companies have already begun entering the Syrian 
market, contributing through investment and reconstruction.  
Today, Syria is rebuilding itself through establishing a new state, 
building institutions and laws that guarantee the rights of all 
without exception.  
A land of ancient civilization and culture deserves to be a state of 
law —protecting everyone, safeguarding rights, guaranteeing 
8 freedoms, and fostering life to flourish while turning the page of 
a wretched past.  We are determined to restore Syria’s glory, 
dignity, and honor.  
And in continuation of the Syrian story,  I declare before you today 
the triumph of truth over falsehood. “Truth has come, and 
falsehood has perished.”  
Syria is reclaiming its rightful place among the nations of the 
world.  
This announcement is the echo of a great people’s will —a people 
who forged glory throughout the ages, who rose again from 
beneath the rubble to restore their rights, their freedom, and their 
dignity.  
On behalf of the Syrian people, I extend gratitude to all who stood 
by their cause, who aided them in their tragedy, who welcomed 
them in their countries, and to all nations and peoples who 
rejoiced in the victory of the Syrian people’s will, and who stand  
with them today in their march toward peace and prosperity.  
I particularly thank Turkey, Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
9 all Arab and Islamic states, the United States of America, and the 
European Union.  
Before I conclude, let me affirm: the suffering Syria endured, we 
wish upon no one.  We are among the peoples most deeply aware 
of the horrors of war and destruction.  For this reason, we stand 
firmly with the people of Gaza, its children, and women, and with 
all peoples facing violations and aggression. We call for an 
immediate end to the war.  
In conclusion, the Syrian story has not ended. It continues to write 
a new chapter, titled: peace, prosperity, and development.  
Thank you, Madam President.  
 