1 
 Statement at the General Debate of the 80th session  
of the UN General Assembly  
24.09.2025 02.25 | United States  
 
   
Source: https://www.president.tj/event/news/52884   
    
 
 

2 
 Your Excellency Madam President,  
Excellency Mr. Secretary General,  
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
Today, as we commemorate the 80th anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations 
Charter, I extend to all Member States my heartfelt congratulations and best wishes on this 
occasion.  
The contemporary world is undeniably experiencing a period of instability, unpredictability, 
and escalating complexity. 
Geopolitical tensions, efforts to reshape a framework of international relations, conﬂicts 
and confrontations in different parts of the world, along with various security threats and challenges, have posed signiﬁcant risks to lasting peace and safety. 
At the same time, the consequences of climate change and growing social inequality 
impose restrictions on the process of sustainable global development. 
In such complex and turbulent circumstances, the role of the United Nations as a platform 
for inclusive dialogue, cooperation and the promotion of peace and security worldwide becomes more important than ever. 
In this regard, our countries should make joint and consistent efforts in international 
practice to protect this principle —a return to full compliance with international law. 
In this process, strengthening equal cooperation among small and large states is also 
considered to be an important and timely step. 
Madam President, 
Tajikistan's National Development Strategy 2030 is fully alignedwith the Sustainable 
Development Goals, and we support the full and timely implementation of this item of 
global agenda. 
Unfortunately, developing countries, particularly those mountainous and landlocked, face 
multiple challenges and difficulties in achieving these goals.  
Particularly vulnerable countries feel the need to take serious measures to ensure sustainable development ﬁnancing and improve access to ﬁnancial resources.  
Despite signiﬁcant attempts in this ﬁeld, the amount of funding for sustainable development offered by the international community continues to be insufficient to address their current need.  
3 
 This situation necessitates timely response, the allocation of additional funds, and a review 
of approaches to the international ﬁnancial system. 
Tajikistan advocates for effective and fair reforms of international ﬁnancial instruments. At present, we are observing varying degrees of economic progress among nations, and the 
inﬂuence of developed nations and international ﬁnancial organizations could play a signiﬁcant role in tackling this issue. 
Many developing and least developed countries remain vulnerable to the impacts of 
economic and ﬁnancial crises, poverty, infectious diseases, including COVID -19, natural 
disasters, and food insecurity.  
They need to implement effective ﬁnancial support measures, including debt relief.  
In our view, now is the high time to seriously consider this important issue. 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
Today, climate change -related issues in various countries around the world, including 
Tajikistan, pose serious obstacles to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.  
Our country, with 93% of its land covered by mountains, is deeply concerned of an adverse 
effect of this situation.  
Changes in the hydrological cycle, a series of ﬂoods and droughts, and severe dust storms over the past decades have had a direct impact on Tajikistan's water and energy resources 
and food security.  
Every year, we suffer tremendous material and ﬁnancial losses due to water -related natural 
disasters.  
Regrettably, these phenomena often result in loss of life and the destruction of vital infrastructure.  
The impacts of climate change and rising temperatures have led to the accelerated melting of glaciers and the deterioration of marine and ocean ecosystems. 
I would like to recall that Tajikistan hosted the High -Level International Conference on 
Glaciers’ Preservation this summer in Dushanbe.  
This meeting brought the international community together to intensely deliberate on 
issues related to the cryosphere.  
4 
 It is worth noting that, of Tajikistan's 14,000 glaciers, which are one of the region's main 
sources of drinking water, more than 1,300 have completely melted, and the rate of melting is accelerating. 
This is even though Tajikistan's glaciers and other water sources account for up to 60 
percent of Central Asia's water resources.  
We must not remain indifferent to matter of addressing issues related to the source of 
human life – water.  
Distinguished delegates,  
Tajikistan plays a proactive role in water diplomacy. 
Our country is taking practical steps in cooperation with its international partners as part of 
its latest initiative - the International Decade for Action, "Water for Sustainable 
Development, 2018 –2028."  
I call on Member States and stakeholders to actively participatein the next event within the 
Dushanbe Water Process – the High -Level International Conference, which will be held in 
Tajikistan next year.  
This event will undoubtedly give new a impetus to our continued joint efforts within the 
framework of the Water Action Agenda.  
We are conﬁdent, that it will also serve as a solid foundation for preparations for the 2028 United Nations Water Conference in Dushanbe.  
Madam President, 
Strong institutions and legal literacy are the ground of a just and stable society. Today, the international community is witnessing disrespect for and violation of 
international law, which is the foundation of order, peace, and stability throughout the world.  
We emphasize the need for strict adherence to international law and the resolution of all disputes and disagreements within the framework of the law. 
Being deeply aware of this reality, Tajikistan proposes that the United Nations General 
Assembly consider proclaiming an International Year of Legal Literacy. 
We call on all Member States to join this initiative and strengthen the global culture of 
transparency and justice. 
Ladies and gentlemen!  
5 
 The rapid adoption of digital technologies and the effective use of artiﬁcial intelligence can 
noticeably contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
I would like to express my profound gratitude to all Member States for their unwavering 
support of Tajikistan's proposal to adopt a special Resolution entitled "The Role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Creating New Opportunities for Sustainable Development i n Central Asia."  
I am conﬁdent, that the Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on July 25 of this year 
will serve as a key instrument for the safe and equitable use of artiﬁcial intelligence in our 
region.  
In this context, we consider the establishment of a Regional Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Dushanbe to be favorable.  
This center would undoubtedly facilitate an implementation of joint initiatives and projects among Central Asian countries in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence.  
It is worth noting that, along with the improvement of digital technologies, the number of new security threats, particularly cybercrime, is also growing. 
We therefore emphasize that cybersecurity must be an important component of collective 
security.  
It is evident that, along with cybercrime, terrorism, extremism, illegal weapons’ smuggling trafficking, drug trafficking, and other forms of transnational organized crime continue to pose a serious threat to global security.  
Tajikistan supports the further expansion of international cooperation on global security within the framework of the Dushanbe Counter -Terrorism Process.  
We are willing to establish constructive interaction within this process with international organizations and the UN member states to even more enhance efforts to counter the 
aforementioned threats and security risks. 
We believe that relevant UN agencies, in particular the Office of Counter -Terrorism, can 
make an effective contribution to the comprehensive implementation of global counter -
terrorism strategies and programs and strengthen their support to Member States in this 
area.  
Distinguished participants,  
Tajikistan gives full support of the resolution of all disputes and conﬂicts through political 
and diplomatic means.  
6 
 We must redouble our efforts to enduring lasting and comprehensive peace based on 
international law.  
A year ago, from this podium, I proposed considering a special United Nations Resolution proclaiming a "Decade of Promotion of Peace for Future Generations."  
A year later, the adoption of such a Resolution has become even more pressing. 
In today's complex and volatile world, this initiative will create conditions for international 
cooperation to achieve lasting peace.  
I call on all Member States to support this proposal for the sake of our current stability and a better life for generations to come.  
Ladies and gentlemen!  
We emphasize our principled, invariable position on the Palestinian issue. 
We believe that lasting peace in the Middle East is possible only through the 
implementation of the United Nations Resolutions and the "Two -State Solution."  
In this regard, we recall the need to resolve this issue exclusively through negotiations and diplomatic means in accordance with international law, particularly the Charter of the United Nations.  
We call for a lasting ceaseﬁre in Gaza and access to humanitarian aid. 
Tajikistan also supports peace and stability, overall security, and socio -economic 
development in neighboring Afghanistan. We are ready to render our assistance in this process and, in this regard, call on the 
international community to provide humanitarian assistance, especially to regions affected 
by drought and recent severe earthquakes.  
Distinguished participants!  
Tajikistan supports the comprehensive reform of the United Nations system within the framework of the "UN80 Initiative," "UN2.0," and the Secretary -General's "Vision for a 
Modernized United Nations."  
At the same time, we welcome the "Pact for the Future" as an important collective initiative 
to promote peace and sustainable development. 
These initiatives embody the shared aspirations and will of the international community to 
respond to modern threats and challenges and build a solid foundation for future generations.  
7 
 We reiterate the need to strengthen the key and coordinating role of the United Nations in 
ensuring inclusive peace and security.  
Only with trust, cooperation, and unwavering determination we can build a just, peaceful, and sustainable future for all humanity. 
Tajikistan stands ready to cooperate with partner countries and all United Nations Member 
States in achieving these noble goals and addressing other pressing issues on the global 
agenda.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 