Page 1 of 7 
 HON. DR. ‘AISAKE VALU EKE  
PRIME MINISTER OF TONGA  
 
 
 
On the occasion of the General Debate  
 
at the Eightieth Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
 
 
 
 
Friday 26th September 2025  
 
 
United Nations Headquarters, New York.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tapu  mo e ‘Otua  Mafimafi  ‘oku  ‘afio ‘i hotau  lotolotonga .  
Page 2 of 7 
  
Distinguished Heads of State and Heads of Government,  
 
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations  
 
Her Excellency Ms. Annalena Baerbock, President of the 80th United Nations 
General Assembly,  
 
Distinguished Delegates,  
 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen.   
 
Madam President,  
 
Allow me at the outset to bri ng Warm malo -e-lelei Greetings from His Majesty’s 
Government and the people of the Kingdom of Tonga .  
 
It is with profound honour to address this esteemed Assembly at its 80th session.  
 
First, I wish to congratulate Your Excellency on assuming the esteemed Presidency 
of the 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly.  We commend yo u 
Madam  President  on your election to preside over this session, and we pledge our 
full support to your leadership.   
 
I take this opportunity to also thank your predecessor, His Excellency Philemon 
Yang, for his able leadership throughout the duration of his mandate.  
  
We also pay tribute to the Secretary -General , His Excellency Antonio Guterres, 
Secretary General of the United Nations, for his steadfast efforts in advancing the 
purposes and p rinciples of the United Nations a nd the roles he has played.  
 
Madam President,  [THEME OF THE 80TH SESSION]             
 
We convene at this 80th session under the theme “Better Together: 80 Years and 
Beyond for Peace, Development and Human Rights,”  a vision to which Tonga 
pledges its full support. For us as a Small Island Developing State, this theme 
resonates deeply: the pursuit of peace, development, and human rights cannot be 
realized without urgent action on climate change, the protection of oce ans, and the 
resilience of vulnerable communities. At a time when climate change has become a 
profound security threat, we must rally around the collective vision of the United 
Nations, for only through solidarity and shared responsibility can we safeguard  our 
Page 3 of 7 
 planet, uphold the dignity of all peoples, and secure a sustainable future for 
generations to come.  
 
As I stand before you in commemorating the 80th anniversary of the United 
Nations, I am pleased to share that Tonga will soon celebrate the 150th anniversary 
of our Constitution  on 4th November 2025. Constitution Day is a profound 
reminder of our sovereignty, unity, and enduring independence. Proclaimed in 
1875 by His Majesty King George Tupou I, our Constitution laid the foundation 
for justice, the protection of land, and the rights of our people. As we mark its 150th 
anniversary, we celebrate not only a historic milestone, but also a living legacy that 
continues to guide our nation and inspire future generations.  
 
Madam President,    [UN CHARTER]  
 
Tonga reaffirms its steadfast  commitment to the purposes and principles of the 
United Nations Charter, first signed in San Francisco eighty years ago. That 
historic document, continues to guide our collective pursuit of peace, security, 
human rights, and development. Its vision endure s as a beacon for 
multilateralism , reminding us that the challenges we face today  can only be 
addressed through unity, cooperation, and respect for international law.  
 
Madam President,                 [UN 80 INITIATIVE]  
 
Tonga welcomes the UN80 reform process as an opportunity to ensure the United 
Nations remains fit for purpose in addressing today’s challenges, just as the Pacific 
undertakes its own Review of the Regional Architecture under the 2050 Strategy for 
the Blue Pacific Continent. For us, reform is not abstract —it is about survival, 
dignity, fairness , and efficiency . If the UN is to deliver for our people, it must deliver 
with us, through us, and in alignment with the principles our Leaders have endorsed. 
This means anchoring Regional Integrated Platforms within the Pacific Islands 
Forum, ensuring financing flows res pond to regionally determined priorities, 
safeguarding access for the smallest administrations, easin g reporting burdens, and 
above all, increasing Pacific representation across the UN system and decision -
making bodies. Only then can we renew trust in multilateralism, ensure that our 
voices shape global outcomes, and guarantee that the Blue Pacific Contin ent benefits 
from effective, inclusive, and responsive multilateral delivery.  
 
Madam President,     [PACT OF THE FUTURE]  
Page 4 of 7 
 Tonga welcomes the adoption of the Pact for the Future, with its annexes —the 
Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations —as both an 
opportunity to strengthen multilateralism in a time of global crises, and a 
responsibility to ensure no  nation, however small or remote, is left behind. Its 
focus on climate action, sustainable development, financing, and intergenerational 
responsibility speaks directly to Tonga’s priorities as a Small Island Developing 
State on the frontlines of climate ch ange, offering a vital framework to accelerate 
adaptation, close critical financing gaps, and safeguard a sustainable world for 
generations to come, while reaffirming the need for inclusive governance where 
Pacific voices help shape the decisions that defi ne our shared future.  
Madam President,   [CHAIR OF THE FORUM ] 
 
Last month, Tonga concluded its chairmanship of the 53rd Pacific Islands Forum 
Leaders Meeting.  The Kingdom was privileged to host Secretary -General António 
Guterres on our shores . His attendance as a Special Guest reaffirmed the deep 
partnership between the Pacific and the United Nations, and further strengthened 
our belief in the indispensable role of this Organization.  
 
Tonga’s tenure as Chair was highly significant, both symbolically and practically. 
Our representation here at the United Nations  as Chair,  afforded Tonga the 
opportunity to assume a lead ership role within the Pacific F amily, guiding 
collective priorities and setting the tone for regional cooperation. It enabled us to 
play a pivotal role in reinforcing Pacific solidarity, ensuring that both small and 
large island states stood together in negotiations with global partners . It also 
amplified Tonga’s voice in international diplomacy by carrying the mandate and 
collective positions of the Pacific region.  
 
Above all, it left us with a legacy of resilience  and provided a vital platform for 
advocacy on issues  central to our peoples’ survival and well -being.  
 
 
Madam President,   (AUSTRALIA’S BID TO HOST COP -31) 
 
For Small Island Developing States, one of the most pressing issues remains the 
existential threat of climate change . For To nga, this is not a remote threat but a n 
unfolding reality that threatens to erase decades of development gains and  imperils 
Page 5 of 7 
 the very existence of our islands. We therefore continue to call for urgent, 
ambitious, and concrete climate action from the international community —action 
grounded in the principles of equity, justice, and common but d ifferentiated 
responsibilities.  
 
It is in this connection that Tonga support Australia’s bid to host COP31 in 
partnership with the Pacific  as a PACIFIC -COP.  We see this as a unique 
opportunity to bring the voices of Small Island Developing States to the forefront 
of the global climate agenda, ensuring that the realities of our peoples are not only 
heard but drive the urgency of action. Hosting COP31 in our region would 
symbolize a global commitment to climate justice and amplify the call for 
solutions that safeguard the most vulnerable.  
 
Madam President,   [ICJ Advisory Opinion)  
 
Tonga welcomes the landmark Advisory Opinion of the International Court of 
Justice on 23 July, a historic decision affirming that climate change is not only an 
environmental crisis but also a profound challenge to international law, human 
rights, and the v ery survival of small island nations.  
 
 
For Tonga, this Opinion is more than a legal milestone —it is a moral victory that 
amplifies the voices of the world’s most vulnerable, strengthens our call for urgent 
action to cut emissions, accelerate adaptation, and deliver on loss and damage 
finance, a nd reinforces our shared duty to secure climate justice, resilience, and 
protection for present and future generations.  
 
It also affirms  Small Island Development State a special case for sustainable 
development , the use of the multi -dimensional vulnerability index (MVI) , more  
managed approaches to international financial standards, and  recognize the need to 
scale up ocean finance.  
 
Madam President,   [FFD4]  
 
Tonga welcomes the Compromiso  de Sevilla , adopted at the Fourth International 
Conference on Financing for Development earlier this year. For Tonga, this 
commitment is especially significant. It calls for a more inclusive, fair, and 
transparent global financial system —one that better responds to the realities of 
countries most at risk, including Small Island Developing States.  
 
Page 6 of 7 
 The Compromiso de Sevilla  speaks directly to Tonga’s priorities: mobilizing 
equitable financing for climate resilience, disaster preparedness, and sustainable 
development; addressing debt sustainability; and ensuring that no country is left 
behind because of its size, geography, o r vulnerability. We see this as a framework 
that can help transform inequality into opportunity, and reaffirm our call for 
development finance that delivers for our people and for future generations.  
 
Madam President, [Ocean Conference]  
 
Tonga joined the international community at the 2025 United Nations Ocean 
Conference in Nice, France, under the theme “Accelerating action and mobilizing 
all actors to conserve and sustainably use the ocean,” where we underscored the 
centrality of sustainable ocean -based economies to Pacific Island Countries that 
rely on the ocean for food security, trade, and culture. We called for integrated 
ocean governance, stronger financing for marine conservation, resilient maritime 
infrastructure, and sustainable transport across our islands, while reaffirming our 
commitment to the Nice Ocean Action Plan and the political declaration. At home, 
Tonga has ta ken concrete steps with the Ocean Management Bill 2025, a landmark 
framework to conserve biodiversity, manage resources sustainably, and protect our 
marine environment for the benefit of our people and future generations.  
 
Madam President,    [Ocean of Peace Declaration]  
 
Tonga is proud  to have joined the Pacific family in the adoption of the Ocean of 
Peace Declaration , declaring the Blue Pacific Continent as an Ocean of Peace. 
This is more than symbolism —it is a shared regional vision that peace, security 
and sustainability are deeply interconnected with how we treat our ocean, how we 
protect our environment, and how we safeguard our communities. Tonga supports 
this declaration fully, and calls for its principles to be embedded in our 
international ocean go vernance, climate action, and sustainable development 
efforts. The ocean must not only be protected —it must be honoured as a 
foundation of our secur ity, of our economies, our way of life – our legacy of 
resilience.  
 
Madam President,    [PACIFIC RESILIENT FACILITY]  
 
It is in this spirit of resilience that Tonga is proud to host the Pacific Resilience 
Facility (PRF), the first Pacific -led, member -owned, and regionally managed 
financing mechanism dedicated to strengthening climate and disaster resilience 
across our Blue Pacific Continent.  
 
Page 7 of 7 
 Tonga acknowledges with gratitude the commitments and contributions already 
extended by our development partners and friends of the Pacific. We continue to 
urge global partners to support our Pacific -led solution, the PRF, designed to 
bridge the financing gap for smaller, high -impact adaptation projects.  In doing so, 
we not only strengthen resilience in the Pacific but also demonstrate how 
regionally owned solutions can advance global climate and  sustainable 
development goals.  
 
Madam President,    [DOMESTIC CONTEXT]  
 
Tonga continues to strengthen laws to protect our children  especially those who are 
susceptible to harm  from technology in this digital age  and empower our youth, 
recognizing them as the foundation of our nation’s future. We remain firmly 
committed to safeguarding public health and addressing the dual threats posed by 
the scourge of drugs and the rise of non -communicable diseases. At the same  time, 
we acknowledge the complex challenges of migration and deportees, while valuing 
the enduring contributions of our diaspora to national development. We also view 
economic development as a vital pathway to opportunity and resilience, harnessing 
trade and sports as drivers of growth, unity, and national pride. Together, these 
priorities embody Tonga’s vision of a just, healthy, and prosperous society where 
no one is left behind.  
 
Madam President  [CONCLUD ING PARAGRAPH ] 
 
And lastly, may I humbly remind this Assembly to seek wisdom and strength 
beyond ourselves. Let us first ask God for guidance in our shared pursuit of peace, 
in advancing sustainable development, and in safeguarding the dignity and human 
rights of all peoples. In humility, we recognize t hat our common challenges are 
greater than any one nation.  
 
In closing, may I share the national motto of Tonga, “Ko e ‘Otua mo Tonga ko 
hoku tofi’a ”. Which translates that God and Tonga are my inheritance. It is from 
this foundation that I draw my strength to serve with humility and dedication.  
 
A reminder that with faith, solidarity, and collective action, we can rise to above 
and beyond  - turning trials into pathways for hope - guided by compassion and a 
spirit of service to humanity.   