Page 1 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY  THE HONOURABLE  
MRS KAMLA PERSAD -BISSESSAR, SC, MP,   
PRIME MINISTER OF THE  
REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO,   
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION   
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY ,  
NEW YORK  
September 27, 2025  
 
  
Page 2 of 17 
 
SALUTATIONS    
  
1.Madam President, Excellencies, distinguished 
delegates, friends.   
  
INTRODUCTION   
 
2.It is an honour  to address this Assembly on the 
80th anniversary of the United Nations.    
 
3.On behalf of Trinidad and Tobago, I 
congratulate you, Madam President, on your 
election.    
 
4.I thank your predecessor, His Excellency 
Philemon Yang, for his service.   
  
UN’S FOUNDING VISION /REFLECTION ON ITS 80 -
YEAR PROGRESS   
 
5.The United Nations has been much more than 
diplomacy; it is a lifeline to many countries, 
bringing education to classrooms, care to 
clinics, recovery to villages, and growth to 
fragile economies.    
Page 3 of 17 
 
6.On this milestone anniversary, we must face a 
hard truth: the spirit of multilateralism is under 
strain, the effects of which, has begun to 
undermine the foundations of stability and 
peace.   
  
THE HARD TRUTH: TRANSNATIONAL CRIME AND 
NARCO -TRAFFICKING   
 
7.Trinidad and Tobago confronts conflicts that 
seriously threaten our stability and peace.  
 
8.The notion that the Caribbean is a Zone of 
Peace has become a false ideal. The reality is 
stark —no such Peace exists today.   
 
9.For too many in our region, peace is not daily 
life but an elusive promise glimpsed, never 
grasped. In its absence, our citizens pay a 
terrible toll.    
 
10. In 2024, Trinidad and Tobago , a nation of 1.4 
million, recorded 623 murders — forty -one per 
one hundred thousand — with over forty per 
Page 4 of 17 
 
cent gang -related, driven by narcotics and 
firearms.  
 
11. In the last 25 years, we have had over ten 
thousand murders, which is equivalent to 
losing 1% of our adult population.   
 
12. Across Latin America and the Caribbean, 
homicides range from twenty to more than 
sixty per one hundred thousand.   
 
13. President Trump’s comments on the 
deleterious effects on countries of relentless 
narco and human trafficking, organised crime, 
and illegal immigration are correct. Countries 
are not only defined by geographical borders 
but also by cultural identities, reli gious beliefs, 
ethnic compositions and legal structures.    
 
14. That is why through legal immigration 
persons are allowed entry because they fulfil 
the criteria to integrate into the existing 
population and add value to their own lives as 
Page 5 of 17 
 
well as their adopted society at large. Illegal 
immigration neglects all checks and balances 
and will only create long term disorder as most 
illegal immigrants will not be able to assimilate 
into the existing societies, inevitably leading 
to greater povert y, crime and cultural 
antagonism.  
 
15. This is not phobia or hyperbole; it is simply 
the truth.   
 
16. Small countries like Trinidad and Tobago also 
suffer from illegal immigration.  
 
17. Because of the recent increased protections 
at the US southern border, Illegal migration of 
drug cartels and criminal gangs has been 
rerouted  into the eastern Caribbean.  
 
18. It is driving increasing gang violence, drug, 
arms and human trafficking.   
 
Page 6 of 17 
 
19. Efforts to repatriate illegal immigrants from 
Trinidad and Tobago within recent times have 
proven difficult.   
 
20. Criminal syndicates are abusing asylum 
requests for refugee status.   
 
21. Therefore, Trinidad and Tobago is particularly 
grateful for the US military presence in the 
southern Caribbean, which has been very 
effective in inhibiting the innumerable 
activities of drug cartels within our country.    
 
22. While there have been objections to the US 
military action against drug cartels from some 
countries, Trinidad and Tobago reminds the 
international community that, unless forceful 
and aggressive actions are taken, these evil 
drug cartels will continue their  societal 
destruction because they believe affected 
nations will always unreservedly subscribe to 
morals and ethics which they themselves 
blatantly flout.   
Page 7 of 17 
 
23. That is why we willingly supported the 
international security alliance announced by 
US Secretary of State Marco Rubio, involving 
the US and several countries in South America 
to combat drug -trafficking in the hemisphere.  
 
 
24. Trinidad and Tobago is committed to 
contributing its resources and capabilities to 
this alliance, in line with the theme of this 
year's General Assembly, 'Better Together'.   
 
 
25. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC), in its 2025 World Drug Report , makes 
the truth unmistakable:    
 
 
26. The global drug economy destabilises  
institutions, corrodes democracy, and 
undermines development.  
 
 
27. It is a war without borders, measured in 
murdered children, broken families, and stolen 
futures.  
Page 8 of 17 
 
28. The cartels and the Governments that enable 
them are taking us for fools.  
 
 
29. If left unchecked, gangs could replace 
governments, and States may stand in name 
but collapse in substance.    
  
HAITI    
 
30. Nowhere is this warning more explicit than in 
Haiti, where armed gangs, political collapse, 
and food insecurity have converged to 
overwhelm democracy and create a protracted 
emergency.   
 
 
31. We commend Kenya for leading the 
Multinational Security Support Mission.   
 
 
32. Trinidad and Tobago endorses the comments 
made by US Ambassador Dorothy Shea on 
August 28th 2025, when she noted that  
 
Page 9 of 17 
 
“the next international force must be 
resourced to hold territory, secure 
infrastructure, and complement the Haitian 
National Police. In parallel, a comprehensive 
approach, which includes disrupting gang 
financing, arms trafficking, and other illicit 
flows  fueling instability, is required to restore 
order in Haiti”.   
  
33. As Member States consider the form of 
greater support, we urge the international 
community to support the US and Panama's 
proposed Gang suppression force to allow the 
deployment of a 5500 -member force to subdue 
the gangs and restore order in Haiti.   
 
 
34. The theme before us is  “BETTER TOGETHER”: 
FROM PRINCIPLE TO PRACTICE.  
 
 
35. This principle, 'Better Together', is not just a 
slogan but a call to action.  
 
 
36. It signifies the collective effort required to 
combat transnational crime, uphold 
Page 10 of 17 
 
democracy, and restore peace and security in 
our nations.   
 
 
37. Therefore, despite being a small country with 
limited resources, we are committed to sharing 
the burden with the US, Panama and willing 
countries in assisting the Gang suppression 
force to bring some semblance of peace to 
Haiti.   
  
  
THE CLIMATE AGENDA   
 
38. This week the climate agenda has been at 
the forefront of many speeches.  
 
 
39. The antagonistic approach adopted by 
climate activists towards the implementation 
of their climate agenda does more harm than 
good.  
 
 
40. Developed countries cannot force feed a 
climate agenda onto developing countries and 
blackmail them into cooperation.  
Page 11 of 17 
 
41. That is exactly what has been happening 
where the access to financial systems, media 
platforms, new technologies and development 
funding has been weaponized in order to 
coerce compliance with climate goals.   
 
 
42. What adds insult to this injustice is that many 
of the same developed nations actively 
supporting the imposition of the aggressive 
climate agenda actually achieved developed 
nation status and prosperity through highly 
environmentally destructive and pollut ing 
industries in the many decades gone by.    
 
 
43. While there is definitely a space for 
renewable energy, the fact remains that fossil 
fuels are essential for our continued survival.  
 
 
44. It cannot be ignored that the thousands of 
products created from fossil fuels, essential 
for daily life cannot be produced economically 
in the quantities required from other means to 
satisfy the current world population.    
 
Page 12 of 17 
 
45. Trinidad and Tobago will within reason 
support actions to protect the environment for 
future generations.  
 
46. However, independent nations must be free 
to create a climate policy that is crafted to 
balance their development goals and poverty 
eradication policies with environmental 
protection.  
 
47. This balance is a pragmatic necessity for 
food security, civil order and economic 
growth.    
 
48. As we progress into a multipolar world order, 
where power is diffused across regions, it will 
be impossible to coerce all actors to adhere to 
the current climate agenda being advocated.  
 
49. Trinidad and Tobago will not adopt 
unbalanced and unreasonable, imposed 
climate policies that will simply lead to the 
exportation of our jobs, lowering of our 
Page 13 of 17 
 
standard of living and stunting of our economic 
development, pushing our people into poverty 
while many larger countries completely ignore 
their responsibilities.   
 
FAITH IN MULTILATERALISM/30TH ANNIVERSARY 
OF BEIJING DECLARATION   
 
50. For Trinidad and Tobago, the United Nations 
has always been unwavering in supporting us 
through crises and empowering our citizens 
through UNICEF, UNDP, ILO, UNESCO, and UN 
Women.   
 
51. In return, we have sought to repay that trust 
by advancing the proposal for the International 
Criminal Court in 1989 ; introducing Resolution 
65/69 on Women and Disarmament, 
Nonproliferation and Arms Control  in 2010 ; and 
signing the Arms Trade Treaty early in 2013 .   
 
52. We also created a Children’s Authority  and a  
Children’s Life Fund ; expanded early childhood 
education; and ensured trailblazing adherence 
to the Millennium Development Goals , 
Page 14 of 17 
 
especially in education, proving that even the 
smallest nations can align domestic progress 
with global ambition.   
 
53. As we now mark the 30th anniversary of the 
Beijing Declaration,  we reaffirm that women 
and girls must be equal partners in peace and 
sustainability, just as we called for in our 2010 
Resolution . We continue to champion their 
empowerment, knowing it is essential to global 
progress.   
  
T&T’S APPEAL FOR SUPPORT AS A NON 
PERMENANT MEMBER OF THE  UN SECURITY 
COUNCIL   
 
54. Our commitment to the United Nations  is 
clear and our voice steady.  
 
 
55. For sixty -three years, we have upheld the rule 
of law, championed human rights, 
strengthened international law, and never been 
silent in the face of injustice.   
Page 15 of 17 
 
56. This is why Trinidad and Tobago sought 
support as a non permenantr member of  the 
United Nations Security Council for the 2027 –
2028 term . We are happy that the same was 
met with a non -objection.   
 
 
57. During our term we will build on this record, 
amplifying unheard voices to ensure that 
justice and equality anchor lasting security.   
 
 
58. Madam President, colleagues, Trinidad and 
Tobago may be small in size, but we are large 
in conviction.  
 
 
59. We continue to ask for your  support so that 
this Council reflects not only the interests of 
the powerful, but also the voices and 
aspirations of all people.   
  
CONCLUSION: TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO REMAINS 
FULLY COMMITTED TO THE UN.    
 
60. Trinidad and Tobago is firmly committed to 
the tenants of multilateralism.  
Page 16 of 17 
 
61. I specially thank Saudi Arabia, the United 
Arab Emirates, Qatar, Turkey, Kuwait, Bahrain 
and Ghana who have been actively working 
with us to increase cultural and economic 
cooperation.   
 
 
62. The United States, Canada, the United 
Kingdom, India, China and the European Union 
remain always reliable partners as they have 
been for decades.     
 
 
63. On this anniversary, let us agree to strive for 
greater cooperation and an openness to 
respecting free speech and dissenting 
opinions.  
 
 
64. Over the past decade there has been an 
inclination to cancel views that are not 
fashionable to the dominating narrative.  
 
 
65. Let us pledge to listen to each other with an 
objective mindset.    
Page 17 of 17 
 
66. Peace and progress can only be fulfilled 
through honest, sometimes uncomfortable 
discussions, and this is the place for it.  
 
 
67. This honest communication is even more 
important in a multipolar world order where 
military and economic power is now 
disseminated across the globe.   
 
 
68. Madam President, Trinidad and Tobago 
commits to the work of this body, not for 
conquest, not for power, but for the sake of 
humanity.   
 
I thank you.   
END  
  
 