1 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF TUVALU   
 
 
NATIONAL STATEMENT  
Delivered by  
 
The Prime Minister of Tuvalu  
Honourable Feleti Penitala Teo,  MP OBE  
 
at  
The 80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly  
General Debate  
[ On the 26 September 2025, in New York, USA]  
 
THEME: Better Together: 80 years and more for peace, development and 
human rights  

2 
 
Madam President.  
Excellencies,  
Distinguished delegations,  
1. I am indeed honoured to once again address this august assembly as the Prime 
Minister of Tuvalu.  
2. I convey to the General Assembly the warmest greetings and best wishes of 
the people and the Government of Tuvalu.  
3. Allow me to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Your Excellency 
President Annalena Baerbock, on your election as President of the 80th 
Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
4. I assure you of my country Tuvalu’s full support for your presidency.  
5. Allow me also to express my sincere gratitude to the outgoing President H.E. 
Philemon Yang for his exemplary leadership over the past year.  
80 Years Anniversary  
6. Madam President.  
7. Let me also express Tuvalu’s heartfelt congratulations to the entire United 
Nations family for this historic milestone of 80 years of existence.  
8. For eight decades, the United Nations stood as a steadfast pillar of peace, a 
champion of multilateralism, and a beacon of hope for humanity.  
9. The UN’s enduring presence is a testament of the transformative power of 
unity and the remarkable achievements made possible when nations join 
forces in a spirit of cooperation and unity of purpose.  
10. Tuvalu takes enormous pride in its membership of the United Nations, 
especially as it celebrates its 25th anniversary of UN membership this month.  
 
3 
 
Madam President.  
11. The occasion of the 80th anniversary of the UN should and must be a moment 
of reflection and re -envisioning to ensure the UN remains true and faithful to 
the objectives of its foundational document, the UN Charter.  
12. Despite our historic achievements, we continue to witness conflicts, persistent 
human right violations and development setbacks.  
13. These challenges run counter to the principles of the UN Charter and serve as 
a stark reminder that our quest for peace, justice and sustainable development 
remain incomplete despite the maturity and the advance age of the United 
Nations.  
14. That is why Tuvalu fully supports the Secretary General’s UN80 Initiative, to 
make the UN more effective and impactful for the millions of lives that 
depend on it.  
UNGA80 Theme  
Madam President . 
15. I commend and applaud the selection of the theme “Better Together: 80 
Years and More for Peace, Development and Human Rights” . 
16. The theme is both timely and fitting, considering the persistent challenges to 
global peace and security and to multilateralism.  
17. The notion of ‘Better Together’ underscore the power of unity and working 
together despite differences amongst nations, because true progress can only 
be realised when the limiting factors to our common objectives and goals are 
adequately addressed.  
18. The achievement of peace, security and sustainable development will hold 
little value if the poor and the most vulnerable are left behind.  
4 
 
19. I, therefore, commend your pragmatic vision in guiding the direction of this 
important and milestone session.  
Climate Change and Sea Level Rise 
20. Madam President  
21. Climate change and sea level rise remain the greatest security threats to 
Tuvalu, and they continue to be the top development and security priorities 
for Tuvalu.  
22. Climate change and sea level rise are multidimensional and cross cutting 
development issues that impact and challenge not only the future statehood 
and sovereignty of Tuvalu, but also the fundamental and integral quality of 
life of the people of Tuvalu in terms of food and water security, land security 
and economic security and prosperity.  
23. Tuvalu continues its strong international advocation for the special case of 
Tuvalu as the most vulnerable of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts 
of climate change, especially climate -induced sea level rise.  
24. Towards that objective, Tuvalu has been vocal and active in its efforts to 
future proof its statehood and sovereignty by seeking to influenc e state 
practices and international law as they relate to the impacts of climate change 
and sea level rise on statehood continuity and the permanency of properly 
demarcated maritime boundaries and the right to the resources therein, 
pursuant to the UN Convention on the L aw of the Sea. 
25. Tuvalu has also taken bold and unilateral actions in this regard.  
26. Tuvalu has amended its Constitution to ens ure Tuvalu’s statehood in 
perpetuity,  and its maritime boundaries  are protected and remain permanent, 
no matter what happens to Tuvalu’s land territory because of climate change.  
5 
 
27. Through the landmark Falepili  Union Treaty between Tuvalu and Australia, 
Australia is committed legally to recognize Tuvalu’s sovereignty in perpetuity 
and supports human  mobility with dignity and rights.  
28. Tuvalu fully supports the efforts of the UN General Assembly in elevating the 
issue of sea level rise as a stand -alone issue and commends its historical high -
level meeting last year in 2024 on sea level rise.  
29. Tuvalu welcomes the decision of the UNGA to convene another high -level 
meeting on sea level rise next year at its 81st session in September 2026 with 
the view to consider a UN Declaration on Sea Level Rise.  
30.  The journey towards the UN Summit on Sea -Level Rise next year must be a 
turning point, securing long -term commitments so that island nations like 
mine are not left to confront the prospect of irreversible loss and damage.  
31. For the anticipated UN Declaration on Sea Level Rise, Tuvalu strongly 
advocates the inclusion in the declaration of the following matters:  
a. Affirm statehood continuity and the permanency of maritime 
boundaries amidst the climate crisis as a principle of international 
cooperation.  
b. Promote secure, organised and dignified pathways for human mobility . 
c. Support the safeguard of culture and heritage of affected communities.  
d. Deliver innovative and rapid financing to enable adaptation journeys of 
the most vulnerable.  
e. Ensure access to knowledge, data, and science to inform strategic 
planning, enhance resilience, and foster global cooperation.  
32. Tuvalu welcomes the recent advisory opinions of the International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) and the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea Convention 
(ITLOS) regarding the obligations of states in relation to climate change.  
6 
 
33. The ITLOS issued on 21 May 2024 the first ever advisory opinion on climate 
change that spelt out for the first time the far -reaching obligations of major 
polluters to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions to prevent catastrophic harm 
and to pay loss and damage s for breach of such obligations.  
34. The ICJ’s landmark Advisory Opinion delivered in July this year validates 
that climate change is an urgent and existential threat to human life and natural 
ecosystems.  
35. The ICJ like the ITLOS, opined that states have a duty to prevent significant 
harm to the environment and therefore they must act with due diligence and 
use all means at their disposal to prevent activities carried out in their 
jurisdictions or under their control from causing significant harm to the 
climate system.  
36. The advisory opinions also affirmed the principles of statehood continuity and 
the permanency of duly demarcated maritime boundaries despite the impacts 
of climate change and sea level rise.  
37. The advisory opinions are significant milestones as they shift the conversation 
from political commitments to legally binding obligations.  
38. Despite the advancement in state practices and the recent judicial 
pronouncements on climate and sea level rise, Tuvalu continues to call  for the 
development of an international Treaty on sea -level rise that  codifi es the legal 
rights of affected states and peoples, and to reaffirm the principles of 
statehood continuity and the permanency of maritime boundaries.  
  
7 
 
39. It is my  hope that the urgency to addres s the existential threat of climate 
change and sea level rise would not be overshadowed by the ongoing 
geopolitical competition  between the superpowers  and the military conflicts 
around the globe.  
40. Madam President.  
41. Whilst the UNGA prepares for the UN Summit on Sea -Level Rise next year, 
Tuvalu continues to fulfil its obligations under the UNFCCC.  
42. With a sense of pride, Tuvalu has presented its first Biennial Transparency 
Report to the UNFCCC which is a testament to Tuvalu’s commitment to 
transparency, accountability and to climate actions.  
43. During this week, I announced the third Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC 3.0) which is Tuvalu’s blueprint for resilience and a pledge to the 
world, linking climate action, sustainable development, cultural preservation, 
and a just transition to 100%  renewable energy.  
44. But the fight for 1.5 degree centigrade cannot be won with carbon dioxide 
reductions alone . 
45. We must tackle methane and other short -lived gases that prevent near -term 
warming to buy time for deeper decarbonization to take root.  
46. Only then, can we protect the world from irreversible tipping points like the 
rapidly expanding coral bleaching that is devast ating our oceans.  
47. Tuvalu has also updated its National Adaptation Plan which provides a 
strategic  and inclusive framework to protect people, ecosystems, 
infrastructure, and cultural heritage from climate change, setting clear 
adaptation pathways in coastal protection, infrastructure, food and water 
security, health, and disaster risk reduction, while addr essing sovereignty and 
cultural preservation.  
8 
 
48. Tuvalu also supports the Fossil Fuel Non -Proliferation Treaty initiative to 
phase out the use of fossil fuel and calls on all nations that are serious about 
confronting the climate crisis to join this initiative and to act decisively to 
protect our planet and future generations.  
Ocean Conservation and Management   
49. Madam President.  
50. Tuvalu has 26 square kilometres of land juxtaposed against 750,000 square 
kilometres of Exclusive Economic Zone, which makes Tuvalu a large ocean 
state.  
51. As such, the ocean is the lifeblood of our economy, the ocean defines our 
cultures and heritage, and the ocean is our very source of existence.  
52. As custodians of the Pacific Ocean, Tuvalu reaffirms its commitment to 
conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources.  
53. To that effect, Tuvalu is in the process of developing its first ever national 
ocean policy not only to coordinate and guide the implementation of our 
commitments under SDG14, but to also discharge our obligations to save and 
keep our ocean healthy.  
54. Tuvalu has ratified the BBNJ Agreement which has achieved the requisite 60 
ratification s threshold to bring it into force.  
55. Earlier this year, Tuvalu joined the global community in Nice, France, for the 
Third United Nations Ocean Conference.  
56. In that gathering Tuvalu joined the Ocean Rise & Coastal Resilience Coalition 
which aim s to support coastal cities by planning and implementing the 
transformations required to address sea level rise.  
57. The Nice Ocean conference reminded us that the fate of our ocean cannot be 
separated from the fight against climate change and sea -level rise.  
9 
 
58. The commitments made in Nice must be carried forward with resolve, 
including through strengthened partnerships and predictable financing that 
empower frontline communities to conserve and sustainably use the ocean on 
their own terms.  
59. In recognition of the need for a holistic approach to peace and security, the 
Pacific Islands Forum Leaders this year endorsed the Blue Pacific Ocean of 
Peace Declaration, an initiative that aims to elevate the peace dimension of 
regional security and prom ote a Pacific -led vision of stability and resilience.  
60. Tuvalu is also proud to announce its firm commitment to co -facilitate the 
Ocean Pioneers Coalition with France and Panama; and that Tuvalu has joined 
the Friends of the Ocean and Climate which is an informal and inclusive group 
to advance ocean -climate act ions and discourse.  
61. Tuvalu shared the disappointment for the inability  of the intergovernmental 
negotiating committee to  finalise  on time the  development of an 
internationally legally binding instrument on plastic pollution , including in the 
marine environment , and urges the leaders and the UN system to continue the 
work and to expeditiously finalise the negotiation of such a treaty.  
Partnership  
62. Madam President , 
63. The principle of ‘Better Together’ is more than a watchword.  
64. It is a powerful affirmation of partnership in the face of increased challenges 
to multilateralism.  
65. The Antigua and Barbados Agenda for SIDS (ABAS), the SAMOA Pathway, 
and the Pact for the Future are key development frameworks founded on this 
shared conviction that align s with SDG 17.  
66. Genuine and durable partnership is not a choice but a necessity.  
10 
 
67. It is a principle that continues to shape international cooperation and respond 
to the unique and persistent challenges that SIDS and LDCs like Tuvalu, 
continue to face.  
68. Tuvalu acknowledges the progress achieved through genuine and enduring 
partnerships.  
69. However, greater global effort remains needed by those at the lower end of 
the global economic scale, like the LDCs and SIDS.  
70. The decadal guide for financial cooperation, dubbed as the Compromiso de 
Seville , fell short of our ambition for a truly transformative global financing 
framework.  
71. Much to our disappointment, there is also the omission of previously agreed 
climate finance language from the document.  
72. Nevertheless, Tuvalu reiterates the call for urgent, scaled -up adaptation 
finance and the rapid operationalisation and replenishment of the Loss and 
Damage Fund, including through the innovative use of Special Drawing 
Rights.  
73. Tuvalu remains steadfast in its call for increased grants and concessional 
financing, improved access to climate change and development funds, 
technology transfer, and capacity -building initiatives that are tailored to the 
special circumstances of SIDS.  
74. Moreover, international financial institutions must reconsider eligibility 
criteria that prevent vulnerable countries from accessing support, simply 
because of income classifications that do not reflect our exposure to 
multidimensional risks.  
75. For Tuvalu, justice in global finance means recognising that vulnerability 
cannot be measured by GDP alone.  
11 
 
76. It means valuing resilience, equity, and the right of every nation, large or 
small, to chart a secure and sustainable future.  
77. Timely and targeted assistance is not charity; it’s a matter of justice and 
survival.  
78. For the foregoing reasons, Tuvalu has joined the Pacific Resilience Facility 
which is a Pacific led and Pacific managed facility to cater for the specific 
adaptation needs of Pacific Island countries in the face of climate change.  
79. Tuvalu calls on the international community, especially the developed 
countries and partner organisations to support the capitalisation of the Pacific 
Resilience Facility.  
Non-communicable Di seases  
80. Madam President.  
81. Non-communicable diseases (NCD) are the leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the Pacific region and in the world at large, and Tuvalu  is not an 
exception . 
82. Poor diet and obesity, intrinsically linked to the food security challenges are 
key contributors to this escalating public health concerns.  
83. Tuvalu, therefore, welcomes the political commitment demonstrated through 
the recent adoption of the Political Declaration on the Prevention and Control 
of Non -Communicable Diseases and the Promotion of Mental Health and 
Well -being.  
84. The acknowledge ment of  the need for coordinated cross -sectoral action s 
reflects a spirit of collective responsibility and exemplifies the critical support 
required by countries most affected by NCDs.  
12 
 
85. At the national level, Tuvalu is fully committed to upholding the 
commitments outlined in the declaration, in our shared pursuit of achieving 
the global targets by 2030.  
Women and Youth  
86. Madam President . 
87. Earlier this week, we commemorated the 30th anniversary of the Fourth 
World Conference on Women and the Beijing Declaration and Plan of Action, 
considered the most progressive blueprint ever for advancing women’s rights.  
88. Tuvalu reaffirms its commitment to gender equality and has taken important 
steps towards that objective.  
89. The Tuvalu Constitution now prohibits discrimination based on sex, 
embedding gender equality in our highest law.  
90. And last year in 2024, Tuvalu adopted a more updated and modern National 
Gender Equity Policy, to assure women’s empowerment and protection from 
violence are integrated across all sectors.  
91. Women rights are not only human rights  but are also a foundation of 
sustainable development, peace and resilience.  
92. For Tuvalu, this means ensuring that women are not only included, but are 
leading in decision -making spaces, from village councils to global 
negotiations.  
93. Equally, Tuvalu places high importance on the role of young people in 
building a more just, sustainable and inclusive future.  
94. As we also marked yesterday the 30th anniversary of the World Programme 
of Action for Youth, we take this opportunity to underscore our support for 
youth development and leadership.  
13 
 
95. We must continue to create the conditions that allow our young people to 
realise their full potential, as active agents for change, as innovators, and as 
partners in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.  
96. Tuvalu recognises that inclusive development cannot be achieved without the 
full and equal participation of women and youth.  
Republic of China (Taiwan) and Cuba  
97. Madam President.  
98. Projecting the principle of inclusivity and leaving no one behind to the UN 
system, Tuvalu deeply regrets the continued exclusion of the Republic of 
China (Taiwan) from the United Nations system.  
99. As a longstanding and reliable development partner of Tuvalu, Taiwan has 
consistently demonstrated its commitment to international cooperation, 
making meaningful contributions across a broad range of development 
sectors.  
100. Tuvalu holds the strong view that the UNGA Resolution 2758 does not 
preclude Taiwan’s meaningful participation in the UN system and Tuvalu 
calls for the admission of Taiwan as a member of the United Nations and its 
specialised agencies.   
101. Similarly, it is regrettable to observe that the people of Cuba continue to bear 
the economic burden of long -standing unilateral economic sanctions, which 
deny them crucial international development assistance and partnerships 
necessary for their recovery and rebuilding efforts.  
102. Tuvalu believes that sanctions which isolate and impoverish entire peoples 
run counter to the spirit of the UN Charter.  
103. Tuvalu supports the lifting of those sanctions and joins other Member States 
in calling for the removal of Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.  
14 
 
Commemoration of sovereignty  
104. Madam President.  
105. Next week on the 1st of October will be Tuvalu’s forty -seven independence 
anniversary.  
106. Though the births of Tuvalu and the United Nations are a generation apart, 
Tuvalu remains grateful for the privilege of being a member of the UN and to 
have engaged and collaborated with the UN family of nations in our common 
pursuit of advancing the vision of this session, “better together: 80 years and 
more for peace, development and human rights”.  
107. I wish to express my special thanks and sincere gratitude to the United Nations 
and its member states, in particular Tuvalu’s generous traditional and 
emerging partners for all the support and assistance afforded to Tuvalu.  
Conclusion  
108. Madam President.  
109. In closing, as we engage and interact during this historical 80th Session of the 
General Assembly, we should do so with full awareness of the complex and 
formidable challenges that confront our international community.  
110. Yet, history has shown us that no challenge is insurmountable when we face 
it together, in solidarity and unity of purpose.  
111. I therefore call upon all Member States of the United Nations family, to move 
forward in unity, guided by our shared purpose and common mission.  
112. Let us remain steadfast in upholding the principles of the United Nations 
Charter, which continue to inspire and give meaning to the vision of this 80th 
Session.  
113. While progress may have not come as swift as we desire, it is far more 
meaningful when it is achieved collectively.  
15 
 
114. For indeed, when we stand together, united in principle, in purpose, and in 
resolve, we not only achieve better outcomes, but more enduring , equitable  
and just .  
115. Thank you and we say in Tuvalu, fakafetai lasi.  
116. Tuvalu mo te Atua.  
END   