Page 1 of 10 
  
 
REPUBLIC  OF UGANDA  
 
 
 
ADDRESS  
 
BY 
 
H.E. MAJ. (RTD)  JESSICA  ALUPO  
VICE  PRESIDENT  OF THE REPUBLIC  OF UGANDA  
 
AT THE  
 
GENERAL  DEBATE  OF THE 80TH SESSION  OF THE UNITED  
NATIONS  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY  
 
Theme:  ‘Better  Together:  80 years  and more  for peace,  
development  and human  rights’  
  
25th SEPTEMBER  2025 
NEW YORK  
 
 
 
 
 
[Please  check  against  delivery ]   

Page 2 of 10 
 The President  of the UN General  Assembly , 
Excellencies  the Heads  of State  and Government , 
The Secretary -General  of United  Nations , 
Distinguished  delegates , 
Ladies  and Gentlemen  
 
I bring  you warm  greetings  from H.E Yoweri  Kaguta  Museveni  who 
could  not be present  personally  and on whose  behalf  I am privileged  
to address  this 80th Session  of the UN General  Assembly.   
 
Madam President,  
 
Let me begin by warmly congratulating you on your election as 
President of the 80th Session of the United Nations General 
Assembly. Uganda assures you of its full support throughout your 
tenure. I also extend our appreciation to H.E. Mr. Philemon Yang for 
his capable leadership during the 79th Session. We commend the 
Secretary -General, H.E. António Guterres, for his continued 
commitment to the roles and responsibilities  of the United Nations.  
 
This year marks 80 years since the founding of the United Nations —
born out of the devastation of the Second World War, with the aim of 
preventing future wars and promoting global cooperation. This 
anniversary is a timely reminder of our shared responsibili ty to 
Page 3 of 10 
 uphold multilateralism and strengthen global solidarity in 
addressing common challenges.  
 
 The theme of this year’s General Assembly “Better together” 
resonates well with our national objectives. Uganda  firmly believes 
that multilateralism remains an essential framework for building 
collective solutions to global problems. We reaffirm our commitment 
to the Charter of the United Nations as the cornerstone of 
multilaterism, international diplomacy and cooperation with the 
global mechanisms to promote and support the intertwined values of 
humanity, namely ; peace and  security, human rights , and shared 
prosperity . We are equally committed to fast -tracking the 
achievement of the 2030 Agenda on sustainable development and 
implementation of the Pact for the Future.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Uganda continues to play an active role in advancing peace, stability, 
and security within our region e.g. Somalia, South Sudan, DRC, 
Sudan, etc. 
 
Uganda remains committed to the peaceful resolution of  regional  
conflicts. We remain  the largest troop contributor to the African 
Union Mission  in Somalia (AMISOM) since 2007, which  was 
Page 4 of 10 
 succeeded by the African Union Transi tion Mission in Somalia 
(ATMIS)  and now the African Union Support and Stabilization 
Mission in Somalia (AUSSOM).  As a country, we have  invested  both 
human and financial resources in promoting peace  and stability  
unreservedly . These efforts require  reliable and  predictable funding. 
We therefore call on the International Community  to commit 
adequate resources for peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions to 
ensure their sustainability , effectiveness  and success . 
 
In South Sudan, Uganda continues to support the peace process as 
one of the guarantors of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), 
contributing to efforts aimed at restoring stability and unity in the 
country.  
 
On the peace efforts in the Eastern part of the Democratic  Republic 
of the Congo, Uganda has been working with regional leaders on the 
Nairobi and Luanda processes aimed at finding a lasting solution.  
We also remain supportive of other complimentary efforts by the 
international community.  
 
We urge greater international support for regionally -led 
peacebuilding and stabilization initiatives, recognizing them as vital 
foundations for inclusive and sustainable development. We also call 
for enhanced global cooperation in tackling the root causes of 
Page 5 of 10 
 conflict, including inequality, climate change, pandemics, new 
technologies, transnational crime, and terrorism.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Uganda calls for the comprehensive reform of the United Nations 
Security Council to address the imbalance in its current 
configuration and make it more equitable, just and democratic.  We 
demand for Africa’s representation on the Council as a special case, 
as a matter of urgency, in both the Permanent and non -Permanent 
categories, in line with the Common African Position enshrined in the 
Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration.   Africa must have two 
seats in the Permanent Category with all rights and privileges and 
two additional seats in the Non -Permanent category.  
 
On the question of Palestine, we  urge the international community to 
give renewed priority to the realization of the internationally endorsed 
Two-State Solution. We appeal to the United Nations Security 
Council to play a decisive and just role in resolving the Palestinian 
issue, which is  crucial for lasting peace in the Middle East and 
central to global peace and security.  
 
Page 6 of 10 
 We join the international community in the long-standing  call to end 
the embargo on Cuba, that has been tightened recently with unfair 
designation as a state sponsor of terrorism.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Uganda is recognized globally for its progressive refugee policies. We 
host the largest number of refugees in Africa —currently standing at 
1.93 million. Uganda allocates land to refugees and integrates them 
into our national systems, sharing public service s such as education 
and healthcare.  
 
However, this model is under serious pressure due to declining 
international support amidst rising global geopolitical tensions. The 
drop in partner funding has strained our already limited resources, 
affecting both host communities and our ability to meet  national 
development targets, including the SDGs.  
 
Uganda remains committed to upholding its obligations, but we 
cannot do this alone , as it diverts vital resources from our national 
development needs . We urge the international community to meet its 
obligations  and support host countries like Uganda. Refugee hosting 
should not become a debt burden. Uganda should not be expected to 
borrow money to care for displaced populations fleeing conflict.  
Page 7 of 10 
  
 
Madam President,  
 
With just five years remaining to achieve the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, progress in many developing countries 
remains far off track. Bridging the estimated $4 trillion annual 
financing gap is crucial. The failure to mobilize adequate resourc es 
highlights the shortcomings of current international financial 
cooperation.  
 
We call on the international community to fully implement existing 
commitments, including the Sevilla Commitment, the 2015 Addis 
Ababa Action Agenda, the 2008 Doha Declaration, and the 2002 
Monterrey Consensus. These agreements provide a framework for 
enabling developing countries to expand their fiscal  and policy  space 
and drive balanced, inclusive development.  
 
Accelerating the SDGs requires renewed commitment to 
multilateralism, global solidarity, and the strengthening of 
international cooperation mechanisms to ensure no one is  left 
behind.  
 
Page 8 of 10 
  
 
Madam President,  
 
Uganda’s commitment to the promotion and protection of human 
rights remains central to our national development agenda. Our 
Constitution guarantees civil and political rights, freedoms of 
association, assembly, and expression, and the right of every citize n 
to participate in democratic governance. Since the introduction of 
multi -party democracy in 2005, Ugandans have enjoyed regular, free, 
and fair elections at all levels of government.  
 
Madam President,  
 
Uganda was first country in the Sub -Saharan Africa to introduce 
universal free primary education in 1987 and universal free 
secondary education in 2007.  An endeavor which has enabled all 
children to attain basic education and has improved on literacy and 
numeracy levels in our country.     
 
Health remains at the core  of our development strategy. Uganda is 
scaling up investments in primary healthcare and deploying digital 
health solutions to improve service delivery and accountability.  
Page 9 of 10 
  
Our HIV/AIDS response remains a global model of political will and 
community engagement. Under the Presidential Fast -Track Initiative, 
Uganda has reduced HIV prevalence to 5.5%, achieved 96% 
treatment coverage among those diagnosed, and over 90% viral 
supp ression.  
 
Madam President,  
 
As the current Chair of NAM, U ganda is committed to advancing the 
principles of unity, peace, and solidarity among its members . We 
support stronger collaboration be tween NAM and the UN in  
promoting the interests of developing countries.   In this context, we 
call for accelerated progress on the adoption of the long -overdue 
Covenant on the Right to Development. Uganda looks forward to 
welcoming the Honourable Ministers of NAM Member States and 
Observers at the 19th Midterm Ministerial Conference scheduled to 
take place in Kampala from 15 -16 October 2025.  
 
Madam President,  
 
As I conclude , the United Nations has stood as a pillar of peace, 
development, and human dignity  for the last eight decades . Its role 
Page 10 of 10 
 remains indispensable. It would be impossible to imagine the world 
today without the United Nations. Uganda acknowledges the UN’s 
many achievements, its legitimacy, convening power, and normative 
influence.  
 
More must be done to adapt and strengthen multilateralism. We 
must redouble our efforts to uphold international cooperation and 
ensure that the United Nations System is reflective of the current 
realities and capable of addressing the intertwined  global  challenges  
of peace  and security, human rights, and sustainable development. 
Let us commit to leaving no one  behind “Better together”.  
 
I thank you.  