Intervention of His Excellency Yvan Gil, Minister of Popular Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela during the “General Debate of the 80th Regular Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN)” New York, September 26, 2025 ∞ Mr. President, 1. Venezuela speaks to the world with the truth. 2. Throughout five centuries, the history of our Country has been marked by an essential idea: achieving a society where equality, justice and freedom reign. 3. It was Simón Bolívar, the greatest man born in American lands, who, with his word and his work, universalized the Latin American and Caribbean spirit and feeling. The ideal that the world must live in balance, that every fight for a better society must have peace as its port, its final destination. Mr. President, 4. The first ships that arrived in our Caribbean Sea came to dominate us. They subjugated our ancestors for 300 years. More than 90 million original inhabitants were exterminated. 5. There began our long struggle of resistance against colonialism and humiliation. 6. Three centuries later, the liberating army, made up of blacks, indigenous people, whites, mestizos, in which slaves, peasants and free men from the entire continent were mixed as equals, left from the coasts of the Caribbean Sea to the heights of Ayacucho and liberated South America forever. Mr. President, 7. We have been a country that learned to fight for its destiny. The 20th century began with a blockade of our coasts in the Caribbean Sea, and a coup d'état against the nationalist general Cipriano Castro, financed by oil companies and the United States government. 8. It was a century of harsh disputes between the ideal of a nation that claimed the sovereign enjoyment of its wealth for its development, and puppet governments that subordinated the country to foreign and imperialist interests. These surrenderist governments plunged Venezuela into the most opprobrious misery and repression for decades. 9. It was at the end of the last century, in 1999, that the Venezuelan people managed to articulate all the historical strength that they had accumulated in decades of struggles for a project of an independent, just and sovereign country. 10. That project, inspired by Bolívar's original ideas and headed by an extraordinary leader, Commander Hugo Chávez, managed to raise a powerful popular movement to make a peaceful and democratic revolution. Mr. President, 11. From day one, President Chávez courageously assumed a nationalist and sovereign oil policy, and embarked on a historic journey to recover the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), as a great multilateral instrument and guarantee of the world's energy security. 12. Today, after 26 years, world public opinion and the people of the world know very well everything that the American power did to overthrow Commander Chávez and put an end to this historic liberation project, supported and successively reaffirmed by the Venezuelan people in 32 elections. 13. With the physical departure of President Chávez, the people ratified in multiple electoral and political events, the historic project of emancipation of Venezuela, which is now led by President Nicolás Maduro. 14. The war that they have waged against us in all forms is also known, and is widely documented, the criminal aggression that they have waged against Venezuela over the last decade to seize its natural wealth and produce a “regime change.” Mr. President, 15. There are countless attacks against Venezuela in recent years: destabilization actions and conspiracies, including an attempted assassination with drones; the economic war, whose cruelest expression is the 1,042 sanctions that are criminally applied against our oil industry and the productive sectors of the nation, as well as several mercenary raids. 16. To all this is now added an absolutely illegal and totally immoral military threat that violates the UN Charter, the rights of Venezuela as a sovereign State, and even the laws of the United States itself. 17. Venezuela thanks this General Assembly for the majority and overwhelming solidarity of the world's governments and peoples, especially the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), the BRICS, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), among others, who have rejected these immoral threats and have supported Venezuelan democracy and Venezuela's right to peace and development. Mr. President, 18. In these early decades of the 21st century, we have known the false and vulgar justifications for invading our sister Iraq, we have witnessed the bombing and destruction of Libya, and the 20-year invasion of Afghanistan. 19. The aggression of global powers has not ceased for a moment. And so, recently, we saw the peaceful Islamic Republic of Iran being bombed in a devious and criminal manner. 20. Today the aggression targets Venezuela, a peaceful and supportive country. 21. Since Venezuela cannot be accused of having weapons of mass destruction or nuclear weapons, today they invent vulgar and perverse lies that no one believes – neither in the United States, nor in the world – to justify a million-dollar military threat that is atrocious, extravagant and immoral. 22. For this reason, we once again thank world public opinion and the United States, the governments and peoples of the world for denouncing this attempt to bring a war to the Caribbean and South America, to promote a “regime change” that will allow them to steal the incalculable oil and gas wealth of Venezuela. Mr. President, 23. No wonder! 24. It is widely known that the people of the United States have repeatedly voted for governments that promised to make peace and end eternal wars. That they promised to dedicate themselves to solving their internal problems: poverty, the addiction epidemic, unemployment and inequality that today characterize American society. And we see how time and time again the noble American people are let down. 25. For this reason, Venezuela today ratifies its Bolivarian vocation for peace, for self-determination and fully assumes – based on the Charter of the United Nations – its right to defend its sovereignty and to defend the peace of the Caribbean and all of South America. 26. Venezuela is part of the new pluripolar world that has been born. It was the ideal of the Liberator Simón Bolívar, when in 1824, on the heights of Junín, on the eve of a decisive battle he said to his soldiers: 27. "Peru and all of America await peace from you, daughter of victory; and even liberal Europe contemplates you with charm, because the freedom of the New World is the hope of the universe." Mr. President, 28. Venezuela defends, fights and works for a world of balance, justice and equality. Without colonial empires. 29. Chávez was the great driving force behind the birth of that world on our continent, with the founding of Petrocaribe, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA-TCP), the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) and CELAC. 30. The Venezuelan people love peace and that is why they are always ready to defend it. We are not afraid of threats, lies, or cannons. The love of freedom runs through our veins. 31. Bolívar taught us this, when in 1818, when faced with the threat of an insolent envoy from Washington, he responded: 32. "It seems that your attempt is to force me to reciprocate the insults; I will not do it, but I do tell you that I will not allow the government and rights of Venezuela to be outraged or despised (...) Fortunately, a handful of free men have often been seen winning powerful empires. Mr. President, 33. The revolutionary government of President Nicolás Maduro fully ratifies its commitment to building a world of respect for the international law; without hegemonic or warlike empires. Where the people of the Global South see our right to peace and the future guaranteed. 34. We are in solidarity with the heroic people of Palestine and demand an end to the genocide of the Zionist regime of Israel. We condemn the attacks against the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 35. We stand in solidarity with Cuba and demand, together with the world, the lifting of the murderous and criminal blockade. 36. Likewise, we express our unwavering solidarity with the people of Nicaragua, worthy heir of Augusto César Sandino. And we demand the complete, immediate and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures against the brother peoples of Belarus, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran and Zimbabwe. Mr. President, 37. We accompany President Putin and the noble Russian people in their fight against neo-Nazism and militarist aggression from the West. 38. We support President Xi Jinping's initiatives to build a community of shared destiny. 39. We ratify the historical position of accompanying the brave Argentine people in the recovery of their Malvinas Islands. And in their fight not to turn Argentina into a foreign military base that threatens the peace of the continent. 40. Venezuela reaffirms the position of the Liberator Simón Bolívar to achieve – sooner rather than later – the definitive emancipation of the people of Puerto Rico and the founding of an independent, free and sovereign Republic. We also renew our support for the just cause of the Sahrawi people. 41. We also ratify our absolute commitment to the “Group of Friends in Defense of the Charter of the United Nations”, which brings together the governments that are considering rescuing the United Nations System, which has fallen into a dangerous decline that threatens its own extinction. 42. Today's Nazis, like yesterday's Hitlers, work for their destruction. We are committed to its consolidation, its dignity. Mr. President, 43. Today we also ratify the course that the Venezuelan people have freely taken. The world must know that Venezuela is prepared to continue along the path indicated by Simón Bolívar and the liberators of America. 44. We have created a powerful national union. We reaffirm before the world that Venezuela has not been, is not, and will never be a threat to any nation. Venezuela has been, is and will always be hope in the construction of a new humanity; of a world of equals, without empires, without blackmail, or threats. 45. A world where colonialism, slavery and exploitation disappear forever. And where peace can be consolidated, and as the Venezuelan poet and singer Alí Primera said, where humanity is human. Thank you very much, Mr. President.