(Please check against delivery)  
 
 
 
 
 
REMARKS  
BY H.E. LUONG CUONG  
PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM  
AT THE HIGH -LEVEL GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH SESSION OF 
THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY  
Theme  “Better together: 80 years and more  for peace, development , 
and human rights” 
 
Madam President,  
I would  like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to you on your election as 
President of the 80th Session of the UN General Assembly. I am fully confident that 
with your experience and able leadership , this Session will be a great success. I would  
also like to pay tribute to  Mr. Philemon Yang, President of the 79th Session, and 
Secretary -General  António Guterres  for their contributions .  
Madam President,  
 Over the past 80 years, in spite of a multitude of challenges, the UN has stood 
as the embodiment of humanity’s aspirations and collective commitment to peace, 
cooperation, and development,  grounded in the universal values of human rights, 
national independence, equality, democracy, and social progress. Multilateral  
cooperation  has brought forth remarkable achievements, especially in preventing 
wars, fostering peace  and cooperation, building friendship s, reducing poverty and 
curbing diseases, improving living standards, and a dvancing science and technology  
at an unprecedented pace .  
Yet today , we find ourselves in a profound ly chang ing world , facing 
unprecedented acute  challenges. Local wars , conflicts, arms races, and the use or 
threat of force in international relations  are escalating  at an alarming  rate. Non -
traditional security challenges are exerting heavy tolls on all countries and 
communities . The global  governance , trading and economic system s are becoming  
fragmented and volatile . Multilateral ism itself is under strain from strategic  rivalry  
among major powers , unilateralism, and a sharp decline in political will and 
necessary resources.   

 2 
This is precisely the time to stand united and together promote  the 
irreplaceable role of multilateralism and a rules -based international order, with the 
UN at its heart .  
Madam President,  
 As a nation that has endured immense pain and  losses from wars, Viet Nam 
treasures  more than most  the priceless  value s of peace. The spirit of peace, amity, 
compassion, and altruism  is deeply woven into our national identity . This forms the 
bedrock for us to overcome previous sufferings, mend old wounds, shel ve the past, 
and look towards the future, with the hope to become a friend and reliable partner to 
all nations  around the world .  
 Peace is both the goal of and prerequisite for our journey toward  a stable, just, 
democratic, and prosperous future. “ Hono uring the value of peace and driving 
robust transformation for a sustainable future ” is the sincere message that Viet 
Nam wishes to share with  the international community on the occasion of the  UN’s  
80th Anniversary . In this spirit, allow me to share my reflections  as follow:  
First, hono uring the value of peace  requires concrete action s, rather than 
just words : 
1. We must  reaffirm the role and primacy of international law  as the  
cornerstone  for peace and equ al relations among nations . All countries should  
clearly demonstrate their responsibility towards uphold ing international law and the 
UN Charter , and respect ing such principles as independence, sovereignty, territorial 
integrity, non -interference , non -use or threat of force, and peaceful settlement of 
disputes.  
Viet Nam welcomes recent efforts to achieve peace and reconciliation, which 
have yielded important results in many regions , such as the peace agreements 
between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and between Armenia 
and Azerbaijan. We value and support all diplomatic efforts  and hope th ey will lead 
to peaceful solutions to regional and global security issues.  
2. We must nurture and practice a culture of peace by building trust, 
enhancing international cooperation and solidarity, promoting dialogue, listening  
and understanding , respecting differences, and cultivating  friendship among nations. 
On this occasion, Viet Nam calls for ceasefire s and an end to all acts of violence, 
protection of civilians, and facilitation of  humanitarian access in conflict  zones .  
Viet Nam welcomes the  recent  recognition of the State of Palestine by more 
countries, and urges  the international community to act swiftly  to end the 
 3 
humanitarian crisis faced  by the Palestinian people. We also reaffirm our solidarity 
with the State and people of Cuba, and call upon the U nited States  to lift its 
embargoes against Cuba and remove Cuba  from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.  
3. We must  further promote  the role of regional organizations in promoting  
peace, cooperation, and development. International  efforts for peace and 
development will be truly  effective when  driven by  regional  organizations  in line 
with particularities  of each region and country.   
As an active ASEAN Member State, Viet Nam is proud of  ASEAN’s grow ing 
strength and its centrality in the Asia-Pacific’s security and development 
architecture. Most recently, ASEAN contributed to the ceasefire agreement between 
Cambodia  and Thailand . We are committed to upholding ASEAN’s  core values of 
solidarity, consensus, and unity in diversity , building a resilient, inclusive, and 
sustainable ASEAN Community, and effectively implementing the Five -point 
Consensus on Myanmar. We shall also strive to mainta in peace, stability, security, 
safety, and freedom of navigation in the South China Sea in accordance with 
international law, particularly UNCLOS  1982 , while fully implement ing the 
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties ( DOC ), and working t o finalize the C ode of 
Conduct (COC) in the  area.  
Second, in a world at a historic crossroads , we must transform boldly to 
shape a sustainable future:  
1. Global governance institutions, particularly the UN and international 
monetary and financial bodies , must undergo vigorous reforms to become  more 
adaptive, ensure equitability , transparency, coherence , and efficiency  in their 
operations , and better respond  to the needs of all countries and peoples. Viet Nam 
welcomes and supports efforts to reform the UN, including the UN80 initiative to  
build a UN 2.0 that is leaner, more coherent , effective  and efficient . This initiative  
must  follow  a holistic and  integrated approach , being driven  by member states . Viet 
Nam stand s ready to share its experience in successful ly implement ing the 
“Delivering as One” initiative of UN organizations in the country .  
2. We must build  sustainable development model s based on  digital 
transformation and green transitio n - two mutually reinforcing  drivers that can spark  
a sweeping revolution as they stand for convergence of scientific and technological 
advancements and environmental sustainability. To opti mize this “dual 
trans formation ”, countries must formulate  relevant master plans, invest  strongly in 
R&D, train high-quality human resource s, and develop  green technology 
infrastructure. Furthermore, it is of great importance to a dvanc e international 
 4 
cooperation on technology transfer and mobilization of green finance . To ensure that 
no one is left behind, developed countries must  take responsibility in sharing and 
transferring technology to developing  and under -developed  countries.  
3. In this digital era, soci eties are undergoing transformations of  an 
unprecedented pace, sc ope, and depth  - accompanied by rising  challenges such as 
poverty, inequality, unemployment, and a crisis of information and trust. We must 
ensure that social trans formation remains  a human -centered process, with focus on 
such priorities as comprehensively eradicating poverty,  providing full  and decent  
employment , and ensuring social  justice  and inclusion . Viet Nam hopes that the 
Second World Summit for Social Development this November will deliver important  
outcomes and add momentum  to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development.  
Madam President,  
From the ruins of war s, once poor, outdated  and isolated , Viet Nam has made 
historic progress . We now enjoy diplomatic relations with 194 countries, strategic 
and comprehensive partnerships with 38 nations , and  member ship in over 70 
international organizations . Viet Nam is now among the world’s  32 largest  
economies and top 20 trading nations . The li ves of over 100  million Vietnamese 
citizens  have vastly  improved, with a sharp drop in multidimensional poverty rate. 
We have  met the Mille nnium Development Goals (MDGs) ahead of schedule, and 
are striving  to fulfil international commitments and on course toward our  two 
strategic centen nial goals : becom ing a modern , industrialized , upper -middle -income 
developing country by 2030, and a developed, high -income nation by 2045.  
On behalf of the State and people of Viet Nam, I express heartfelt  gratitude to  
the UN and its agencies, member states and partners  who have  been  walk ing with us 
on this journey . 
Guided by the spirit of self-reliance, resilience, and solidarity for the common 
cause , Viet Nam pursues an independent, self -reliant  foreign policy for peace, 
cooperation, and development , while diversif ying and multilateraliz ing our external 
relations, and strive to further expand and deepen our international integration  in a 
more proactive manner .  
With a  strong commitment to being a friend, a reliable partner, and a 
responsible member of the international community, Viet Nam will continue to make 
every effort and stand  with all nations to shoulder our shared responsibilities,  
overcome challenges , and foster transformative changes to build a world of  peace, 
stability, prosper ity, and sustainability , delivering happiness and well-being to all.  
 5 
Viet Nam is active ly prepar ing to assume the Presiden cy of the 11th Review 
Conference of the Treaty on the Non -Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 2026 , and 
looks forward to the valuable support of Member S tates for our candida cies to the 
UN Human Rights Council for the 2026 - 2028  term, and to the International 
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for the 2026 - 2036  term. We particularly  look 
forward to welcoming all of you to Ha Noi  on 25 October  for the Signing Ceremony 
of the UN Convention against  Cybercrime.  
I thank you. 
 