1 
 
1 
  
Confidential  
 
(This Document is the Property of the Government of the Republic of Zambia)  
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL DEBATE STATEMENT BY  
HON. MULAMBO HAIMBE, MP, SC,  
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION,  
TO BE DELIVERED DURING THE 80TH UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY GENERAL 
DEBATE TO BE DELIVERED ON 29TH SEPTEMBER 2025 AT THE UN 
HEADQUARTERS IN NEW YORK  
 
 
 
 
SEPTEMBER, 2025  
 
 
 

2 
 
2 
 ▪ Your Excellency Madam AnnalenaBaerbock - President of the 
80th Session of the United Nations General Assembly;  
▪ Your Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary -General of the 
United Nations;  
▪ Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government;  
▪ Distinguished Delegates  
I am honored to address this august Assembly on behalf of Mr. Hakainde 
Hichilema , President of  the Republic of Zambia . Allow me at the outset to 
congratulate you, Madam President, on your election to the presidency of 
the 80th Session of the General Assembly.  
The choice of theme, “Better Together: 80 Years and More for 
Peace, Development and Human Rights”  is timely as it underscores 
the need for us to work together for the common good, in the face of 
multiple global challenges.  In this regard, Zambia reaffirms its faith in 
multilateralism and the United Nations Charter, a key foundation of our 
shared commitment to international peace and cooperation . 
Over the past eight decades, the United Nations has been the cornerstone 
of global peace, security and cooperation. It has helped prevent major 
conflicts, advanced decolonization, supported peacekeeping missions and 
played a leading role in advancing global action in public health, education 
and humanitarian relief that have saved countless lives. Through initiatives, 
such as the Sustainable Development Goals, it has mobilized nations to 
reduce poverty, improve public health and education, as well as promoted 
gender equality.  
We also note that peace is intrinsically intertwined with development as 
there can be no sustainable development in the absence of peace.  
Therefore, the UN’s efforts at peace building and peace keeping are very 
critical for the development of all regions of the world even those 
seemingly distant from the war front.  
3 
 
3 
 We recognize, however, that the UN has been slow to react to some of the 
conflicts ituations  which ha s led to serious humanitarian crises.  We also 
acknowledge the need for key reforms and genuine inclusiveness 
particularly for Africa, whose voice remains stifled . After eight decades , we 
must reflect on this and other areas that could be enhanced.  
Though challenges remain, the United Nations has proved that 
multilateralism can deliver tangible progress for humanity. We are 
confident  that the Pact for the Future and the Declaration on Future 
Generations agreed upon during the 79thSession  renew s our  hope and 
solidarity to sustain the momentum of the past eighty years.  
Madam President  
At 80 years, the United Nations has a wealth of experience to draw on, but 
it must also continue to renew itself and adapt  to the changing landscape 
to remain fit -for-purpose .  
We therefore welcome the UN80 Initiative at this critical time that the 
organization is facing unprecedented financial constraints. If executed well, 
these reforms have the potential to transform how the UN works by 
enhancing efficiencies through review of the implementation of its 
mandates, introducing structural changes and programme realignment.  
Madam President,  
As we undertake these reforms it will be important to ensure that the 
pursuit of efficiency, should not be at the expense the UN's reach and 
impact on the interests of developing countries, particularly those facing 
the largest implementation gaps in the SDGs. The UN80 Initiative must 
strengthen delivery in the three core pillars of the United Nations of peace 
and security, development and human rights. We must preserve those 
parts of the UN that work. For instance,  theResident Coordinator system 
has helpe d coordinate various UN development agencies to ensure they 
work together effectively, efficiently and transparently in supporting the 
4 
 
4 
 host governments achieve SDGs. These reforms must served to strengthen 
the RC system.  
 
Madam President  
We meet at a critical moment, when escalation in geopolitical tensions 
pose a significant threat to the gains made in the eighty years of the 
United Nations existence . This exacerbate s the existing challenges and 
places multilateralism under threat . 
Further, we have witnessed  how challenges such asongoing conflict  
situation , climate shocks and the pandemic havenegatively impacted the 
global economy . It is therefore , clear that a short period  of war or 
crisis can erase decades of development gains . We therefore, 
categorically condemn war and aggression and urge all parties in conflict to 
choose diplomacy over violence. Allow me to re -echo President Hakainde 
Hichilema ’s constant reminder to the world that “instability anywhere is 
instability everywhere!”  
Zambia therefore remain s an advocate for peace, human rights, good 
governance and inclusive development for a strengthened multilateral  
system .  Further, we remain committed to the principles enshrined in the 
United Nations  Charter.  
Zambia has been actively engaged in regional peace efforts. We continue 
to support the work of the African Union and regional organizations in 
mediation and peacekeeping, including in the Horn of Africa and the Great 
Lakes region.  
Here at the United Nations, we as African Nations count on the continued 
support of the international community in initiatives to “silence the guns” in 
Africa and resolve conflicts worldwide, for a more secure world.  
5 
 
5 
 Madam President  
Inspired by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and our national 
vision, we have undertaken bold reforms to improve the lives of our 
people, even as we recover from the devastating drought that affected our 
county  in 2024.  
A cornerstone of our strategy is investing in our people, especially the 
youth . Believing that education is the greatest equalizer, our Government 
introduced free primary and secondary education  for all children and 
recruited a record number of teachers to improve the quality of education.  
We further recognise that a healthy population underpins productivity and 
inclusive growth. Zambia therefore, remains steadfast in its pursuit of 
health for all by building resilient, equitable, and accessible health 
systems. We are expanding infrastructure, providing essential supplies, and 
deploying thousands of health workers to underserved areas , among other 
interventions.  
While we recognize the changing landscape in Official Development 
Assistance, we call on development partners to continue their support to 
HIV/AIDS programmes especially with antiretroviral therapy , so that 
countries such as Zambia that have made progress in the fight against HIV 
do not regress on account of funding constraints.  
We therefore, look forward to the upcoming World Social Summit in Qatar 
that will accord us an opportunity to engage on key social development 
issues and advance social progress, ensuring that no one is left behind in 
our global sustainable development journey.  
We urge all Member States and development partners to prioritize 
health spending as a strategic investment because human capital 
is the greatest asset of any nation.  
Madam President  
To protect the most vulnerable, Zambia has scaled up social safety nets . 
Our Social Cash Transfer programme  now reaches over 6.5% households . 
This and other c omplementary initiatives such as food security packs  and 
6 
 
6 
 skills training has been crucial in cushioning families from shocks and lifting 
communities out of extreme poverty.  
Madam President  
We believe that empowering women is more than just a moral duty . When 
women thrive, families prosper, and nations advance. We therefore , place 
women and youth at the center  of our transformation  through a ffirmative 
measures that enhance women ’s participation in decision -making and 
protect their careers and families. We continue to lead efforts to eliminate 
gender -based violence and child marriage  through strengthening  laws and 
community awareness program mes.  
Wecall on the international community to redouble efforts toward 
gender equality, especially as we commemorate the 30th 
anniversary of the Women’s Conference and Beijing Programme 
of Action . 
Madam President  
Zambia’s economy, like many other developing countries, has endured 
turbulent times in recent years. Upon assuming office, our Government’s 
highest priority was to restore macroeconomic stability, which we are 
steadily delivering. We implemented difficult but necessary reforms to 
restructure our public debt in order to create fiscal space.  
This debt restructuring, alongside our ongoing IMF -supported program me, 
has put Zambia firmly on a path to debt sustainability and renewed 
investor confidence. However, stabilizing the economy is only the first step. 
We are equally focused on reigniting growth and economic transformation 
through diversification.  
Madam President  
The existential threat of climate change  looms over all our aspirations. 
Despite our minimal  contribution  to global emissions, many 
7 
 
7 
 developing countries often experience increasing frequency of climate 
shocks such  as droughts and destructive floods.  
In this regard, we look ahead with hope to the upcoming COP30  in Brazil, 
which will mark the 10th anniversary of the Paris Agreement. This milestone 
conference must be a turning point from promises to action . Zambia has 
submitted its revised Nationally Determined Contribution, NDC 3.0 and we 
therefore , encourage other countries to do the same with enhanced 
ambition to be within reach of the 1.5°C goal.  
We must act now, to limit global warming and adapt to its effects . 
Let us summon the political will for bold action that safeguards 
the planet for future generations.  
 
Madam President  
Five years to the year 2030, only 17% of SDGs are on track. We also note 
that several developing countries remain fiscally constrained in directing 
sufficient resources towards SDGs on account of increasing debt burdens, 
highlighting the need to strengthen mechanisms for resolving debt crises.  
Against this backdrop, Zambia was privileged to have co -facilitated the 
outcomedocument of  the Fourth International Conference on Financing for 
Development, which unanimously adopted the Sevilla Commitment . This 
outcome has  renewed global consensus to close the $4 trillion annual SDG 
financing gap.  
It is now time to move from commitments to action. We call on nations, 
development banks, and the private sector  to align their policies and 
investments with the SDGs. Official Development Assistance, a lifeline for 
Least Developed Countries must be protected . There is need to scale up 
domestic resource mobilization, embracing innovative financing 
mechanisms , tackling illicit financial flows, and promoting private sector 
involvement .  
Madam President  
8 
 
8 
 For too long, the current international financial architecture has 
perpetuated structural inequalities, particularly for developing countries. 
The post -war institutions designed to promote global economic stability 
and growth no longer reflect today’s geopolitical and economic realities.  
Many African countries, continue to bear the weight of unsustainable debt, 
limited access to concessional financing, and the effects of global shocks 
beyond their control - from climate change to pandemics and geopolitical 
conflicts.  
We, therefore, welcome the commitments from various stakeholders for 
comprehensive reform of the global financial system . This reform should 
include governance reform of global financial institutions to strengthen 
representation of developing countries in international economic decision 
making. Zambia further, welcomes initiatives such as the borrower’s forum 
to ensure fair and timely resolution  of debt . 
Madam President  
Zambia is both a Least Developed Country (LDC) and a Landlocked 
Developing Country (LLDC) .These two categories of countries fac e unique 
structural challenges. In July 2025, Zambia was privileged to co -host the 
LDC Future Forum in Lusaka , whose insights on building resilience to 
shocks and the need for innovation to address challenges were 
empowering. During the conference our Republican President Mr. Hakainde 
Hichilema underscored the need for LDCs to be build resilience by being 
more proactive and self-reliant.  
As a landlocked country, Zambia welcomes the Awaza Programme of Action 
which prioritizes structural transformation, trade facilitation, regional 
connectivity, resilience, and ICT  infrastructure, which reflect  our own 
priorities. We also welcome the Awaza’s call for innovative financing.  
Landlocked need not mean isolated and incased . As our President fondly 
states, LLDCs can become land -linked rather than land -
locked andwe in Zambia are committed to making this vision a reality.  
Madam President  
9 
 
9 
 The theme of this session, “Better Together,”  also compels us to reflect on 
the United Nations ’ readiness to address today’s complex challenges. The 
Security Council’s current composition and working methods reflect a 
bygone era and are overdue for reform . Decisions on critical peace and 
security issues are too often stalled by the veto power of a few, even when 
the wider membership speaks clearly. Africa, with 1. 4 billion people, still 
has no permanent seat, a historical injustice that must be rectified.  
Zambia therefore , reaffirms the Common African Position on Security 
Council Reform, as set out in the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration. 
We call for comprehensive reform that expands both permanent and non -
permanent membership to make the Council more equitable, effective, and 
reflective of today’s world.  
Madam President, Excellencies , 
Eighty years ago, the world emerged from war with a promise to never 
again allow division and destruction to define our collective future. That 
promise is being tested today.  
Let this 80th General Assembly be remembered as a turning point where 
the world chose solidarity over silence , justice over inertia , and 
unity over division . 
We must act, not out of fear, but out of hope  not in isolation, but in 
solidarity as we are  better together . 
I Thank You. 