 
   
 
 
ZIMBABWE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 SEPTEMBER 2025  
 
 
NEW YORK  
 
STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY DR. EMMERSON D. 
MNANGAGWA,  
 
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE,  
 
DELIVERED BY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE,   
 
DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH 
SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL 
ASSEMBLY  
 
 
 
 
 
HON PROF dr. AMON MURWIRA,  
 
DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 80TH 
SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL 
ASSEMBLY  
Page 2 of 14 
 Your Excellency, Ms Annalena Baerbock, President of 
the 80th Session of the United Nations General 
Assembly;  
 
Your Majesties;  
 
Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government;  
 
The Secretary -General of the United Nations, Mr. 
António Guterres;  
 
Distinguished Delegates;  
 
Ladies and Gentleman;  
 
 
0.   I am humbled to issue this national statement on behalf of His 
Excellency The President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Dr. E.D. 
Mnangagwa.  
 
1.  Let me warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on your 
election as President of the 80th Session of the General 
Assembly. We are confident that under your stewardship, this 
milestone session will be remembered for renewed multilateral 
cooperation. Please be assured of Zimbabwe ’s support 
throughout your tenure.  
 
Page 3 of 14 
 2. We, also, wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, His 
Excellency, Philemon Yang, for his leadership during a period 
marked by heightened geopolitical tensions and a retreat from 
multilateralism.  
 
3.   This 80th anniversary of the signing of the UN Charter is a timely 
opportunity for us to reflect upon the journey of the past eight 
decades. The resolve of the 50 nations that gathered in San 
Francisco in 1945 was to save the world from the scourge of 
war and conflict . Today, 193 nations are here to bear witness 
that, since then, the United Nations has endured as the 
legitimate multilateral institution to address issues of global 
interest and concern.  
 
4.  Yet, we commemorate this milestone at a time of profound 
uncertainty, when the world is confronted by escalating 
conflicts, economic slowdowns, increasing poverty and widening 
inequality, humanitarian tragedies, and the vagaries of climate 
change.  
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 14 
  Madam President,  
5.  MULTILATERALISM : It is our collective responsibility to 
recommit to the principles and purposes of the UN Charter for 
the benefit of present and future generations. As Zimbabwe , we 
have anchored our foreign policy on multilateralism, guided by 
the principles of sovereignty , equality and peaceful coexistence  
among nations . We believe that no nation can prosper in 
isolation . Zimbabwe’s p articipati on in multilateral processes is 
therefore aimed at advancing peace  and security , human rights , 
and sustainable development for the integrity , dignity and 
prosperity for all.  
 
6.   We welcome the Secretary -General’s UN80 Initiative  on 
reforming the UN. The reform must allow the Organization to 
evolve in line with contemporary realities, while strengthening  
and not diminishing the voice and participation of developing 
countries. Any reform that sidelines the aspirations of the Global 
South run s contrary to the very spirit of the UN Charter. For the 
United Nations to remain legitimate, effective, and responsive, 
its reform must be  Member State driven, inclusive, and anchored 
in the principle of sovereign equality of all Member States. This 
anniversary must, therefore, serve as a sol emn reminder that 
Page 5 of 14 
 humanity achieves more by working together than by working 
apart and against each other.   
 
Madame President,  
7. PEACE AND SECURITY : It is clear that peace, development, 
and human rights can only be fully realized through the reform 
of global governance institutions. The global economic, political 
and security architecture s established after the Second World 
War no longer reflect today’s realities.   In 1945 a large 
percentage of the current UN Member States, including 
Zimbabwe, were colonies.  
 
8. To this end, w e reiterate Africa’s long -standing call for the 
comprehensive reform of the United Nations Security Council. 
Africa’s continued total exclusion from the permanent category 
and underrepresentation among non -permanent members is an 
aberration which requires urgent redress. Decisions on Africa 
cannot conti nue to be made without Africa at the table.   We 
cannot be back to 1884.  
 
Page 6 of 14 
 9. Madam President, Zimbabwe underscores the importance of 
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council and 
regional organisations, such as the African Union, to address the 
root causes of conflicts. We believe that sustainable peace 
cannot be achieved without advancing the Women, Peace and 
Security, and Youth, Peace and Security agendas, recognising 
women and youth as indispensable partners in building lasting 
peace.  
 
10.  In our Region, the Southern Africa Development Community 
(SADC), we emphasi se inclusive peace processes. We stand by 
the principle that peace is not merely the absence of war, but 
the presence of justice, equity and respect for human dignity. 
Working with other Member States, Zimbabwe has contributed 
towards the resolution of confl icts in the Region, including 
spearheading joint diplomatic efforts with the East African 
Community (EAC) , in the search for peace in Eastern DRC.  
 
11. Our consistent contribution to UN peacekeeping missions in 
conflict areas, is a testimony to our commitment towards peace 
and security for all. Zimbabwean peace -keepers have 
Page 7 of 14 
 demonstrated a high degree of professionalism wherever they 
have been deployed.  
 
12. Guided by this legacy of commitment to peace, Zimbabwe has 
presented its candidature for a non -permanent seat on the 
United Nations Security Council for the term 2027 –2028, 
determined to share its experiences  and make its contribution  
in promoting a safe and secure world.  
 
13. We trust that our candidature merits the invaluable support of 
all Member States at the election to be held in June 2026. 
Zimbabwe  pursues a doctrine of  friend to all and an enemy to 
none. As such we are ready and available to work with all 
members of the United Nations.  
 
 Madame President,  
14. Zimbabwe was born out of a protracted armed struggle for 
freedom and independence, hence its continued solidarity with 
the people of Palestine and Western Sahara in their justified 
search for self -determination. The Palestinians have endured 
Page 8 of 14 
 severe, sustained, and systematic injustices under the glare of 
the international community . 
 
15. Time has come for the establishment of lasting peace in the 
Middle East, especially the implementation of the two -state 
solution for the peaceful co -existence of Palestine and Israel.  
 
Madame President,  
16. SUSTAINABLE  DEVELOPMENT:  In Zimbabwe, the  doctrine  
of “leaving no one and no place behind” defines the core of our 
national development trajectory. Guided by our National 
Development Strategy, we are undertaking comprehensive 
reforms and targeted investments to transform and build our 
country, brick by br ick, resulting in a consistent GDP growth of 
around 6% for the past few years.  
 
17. Reforms to our critical economic sectors, including agriculture, 
mining, tourism, and manufacturing, have resulted in significant 
levels of investment, positively changing the lives and 
livelihoods of our people. Strengthening our social protection 
frameworks remains a top priority. The empowerment of 
Page 9 of 14 
 women, youth and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs)enhanced 
inclusivity and broad participation in national development 
processes by all citizens.  
 
18. In addition to Zimbabwe is mainstreaming climate action across 
all development planning processes.  Our focus is on expanding 
renewable energy, strengthening early warning systems, scaling 
up climate smart agriculture, accelerating dam construction, and 
increasing the utilisation of irrigation systems.  Zimbabwe is 
ready and available to share with the UN Me mber States, our 
successful Pfumvudza/Intwasa climate smart agriculture model, 
among our many economic empowerment models.  
 
Madame President,   
19. We reaffirm our commitment to the Paris Agreement and the 
principle of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities. As we 
approach COP30, Zimbabwe calls on all States to demonstrate 
greater ambition by enhancing their Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC s).  
 
Page 10 of 14 
 20. Madam President , we welcome the adoption of the Awaza 
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries. We 
hope our commitments will be translated into tangible action, in 
line with the broader objective of reforming the international 
economic order to make it fairer, more inclusive and responsive 
to the needs of developing countries.  
 
21. The role of ICT and AI in transforming lives and accelerating 
development is indisputable. It is, however, equally  observed  
that criminals are using ICT for harmful behaviour, with serious 
destabilizing consequences to society. Zimbabwe remains 
supportive of the establishment of  framework s and strategies  
to combat the use of technology for criminal purposes. The 
Global Dialogue on AI Governance should assist  all countrie s. 
We applaud the deliberate efforts by the UN Secretary General 
towards optimising the benefits of technology while minimising 
the potential harmful effects of the same.  
 
22. Financial Architecture:  We reiterate our support for the 
commitments undertaken at the Fourth International 
Conference on Financing for Development in Seville, Spain. It is 
important that we implement these commitments, and also 
Page 11 of 14 
 operationalise the SDG Stimulus. Without the means to 
implement our collective decisions, regression is inevitable.  
 
23. The global economic and financial system remains skewed 
against the Global South, compounding debt distress and 
entrenching poverty. The reform of the international financial 
architecture is a critical necessity to unlock development 
finance, especially fo r the developing countries that have 
remained peripheral to the development chain.  
 
24. Madame President , we emphasize the  importance of  a fair 
and rules -based international trading system that ensures 
equitable opportunities for all nations, particularly developing 
countries.  
 
Madame President,  
25. HUMAN RIGHTS : We uphold that the principle of all rights, 
civil, economic, political and social and cultural are 
interdependent and indivisible. We reject attempts to elevate 
some rights over others. We equally reject the selective, 
Page 12 of 14 
 arbitrary, political and biased application of human rights 
frameworks and standards.  
 
26.  We reaffirm our support through the Non -Aligned Movement, 
for a legally binding Covenant on the Right to Development, an 
essential framework to strengthen the global development 
agenda.  
 
27. In December 2024, Zimbabwe abolished the death penalty, 
reaffirming our commitment to the sanctity of human life.  
 
28. Madame President , despite our gallant efforts towards 
national prosperity, we have continued to face challenges, 
occasioned by the illegal Unilateral Coercive Measures (UCMs) 
imposed on us. We, therefore, reiterate the call for the 
unconditional removal of these unjustified and unwarranted 
sanctions, for Zimbabwe to realise its full potential.  
 
29. Our people have remained resilient against this adversity 
encouraged by the unwavering solidarity and support from our 
sister SADC countries, the AU, and other progressive partners 
Page 13 of 14 
 across the world. We are greatly indebted to this magnanimous 
pillar of support.  
 
30. Zimbabwe, also, stands in solidarity with other nations under 
UCMs, especially the Government and people of Cuba in their 
continued fight against one of the longest economic blockades. 
We reiterate our call for the removal of this comprehensive 
embargo.  
 
31. We welcome the designation of 4 December as the 
“International Day against Unilateral Coercive Measures”. This 
should increase voices against the human cost of sanctions, 
reaffirm diplomacy over domination, and advocate for a return 
to legality, legitimac y, and multilateral cooperation.  
 
32. Madame President,  The United Nations today stands at 
crossroad s, amid multiple and intersecting crises. However, Let 
us seize this anniversary to renew our covenant for peace, 
recommit to development, and strengthen the pillars of 
multilateralism that truly serves “we the peoples.”  
 
Page 14 of 14 
   
33. The great lesson from the Covid -19 pandemic was tha t “no one 
is safe, until everyone i s”. Similarly, our sustainable future is 
possible only when we leave no one  and no place  behind. Let 
us build the future we all want, together.  
 
 
I Thank You!  
 